PRO  B ST H AIN’S 


ORIENTAL  SERIES 


VOL.  XIX. 


THE  ETHICAL  AND  POLITICAL 
T-  WORKS  OF  MOTSE  M 


THE  ETHICAL  AND 
POLITICAL  WORKS 


ARTHUR  PROBSTHAIN 
41  Geeat  Russell  Steeet,  London,  W.C. 
1929. 


. lillSttAMfi  Mttt  CCLHI. 


TO 

F.  Z.  iV^. 

WHOSE  INTEBEST  INSPIRED  INDUS TBY 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Preface 


BOOK  I 


CHAP. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 

VII. 


Befriending  the  Learned 
Self-cultivation  . 

On  Dyeing  .... 
On  the  Necessity  of  Standards 
The  Seven  Causes  of  Anxiety 
Indulgence  in  Excess  . 
Threefold  Aegujment 


BOOK  II 


VIII. 

IX. 

X. 


Exaltation  of  the  Virtuous  (I)  . 

Exaltation  of  the  Virtuous  (II)  . 
Exaltation  of  the  Virtuous  (III) . 


BOOK  III 


PAGE 

xi 


1 

6 

9 

13 

17 

22 

28 


30 

36 

48 


XI. 

Identification  with 

THE 

Superior 

XII. 

(I)  . . . 

Identification  with 

THE 

Superior 

55 

XIII. 

(II)  . 

Identification  with 

THE 

Superior 

59 

(III)  . 

* 

. 

70 

BOOK  rv 

XIV. 

Universal  Love  (I) 

■■  ■' ' ' • ■ ' 

78 

XV. 

Universal  Love  (II) 

■ *. 

81 

XVI. 

Universal  Love  (III) 

. . ‘ 

87 

CONTENTS 


viii 


CHAP. 

BOOK  V 

PAOE 

x\t:i. 

Cokdemnatiok  op  Ofpessive 

War 

(I)  . . . . . 

. ■■■■■.. 

98 

XYIII. 

CoNDEMNATIOSr  OF  OFFENSIVE 

War 

{II)  . . . . . 

101 

XIX. 

Condemnation  of  Offensive 

War 

(III)  . . . . . 

• 

107 

BOOK  W 

XX. 

Economy  of  Expenditdees  (I) 

, 

117 

XXI. 

Economy  of  Expenditures  (II) 

120 

XXII. 

Economy  of  Expenditures  (HI). 

XXIII. 

Simplicity  in  Funeral  (I). 

XXIV. 

Simplicity  in  Funeral  (II). 

xxv. 

Simplicity  in  Funeral  (III)  . 

• 

123 

BOOK  VII 

XXVI. 

Will  of  Heaven  (I)  . . 

135 

XXVII. 

Will  of  Heaven  (II) 

141 

XXVIII. 

Will  of  Heaven  (III)  . 

151 

BOOK  VIII 

XXIX. 

On  Ghosts  (I). 

XXX. 

On  Ghosts  (II). 

XXXI. 

On  Ghosts  (III) 

160 

XXXII. 

Condemnation  of  Music  (I)  . 

• 

176 

BOOK  IX 

*t  XXXIII. 

Condemnation  of  Music  (II). 

XXXIV. 

Condemnation  of  Music  (HI). 

XXXV. 

Anti-Fatalism  (I)  . 

• 

182 

CONTENTS 

ix 

OBAF. 

PAOB 

XXXVI. 

Aitti-Fatalism  (II)  .... 

189 

XXXVII. 

Anti-Fatalism  (III) 

194 

*txxxviii. 

Anti-Confucianism  (I). 

XXXIX. 

Anti-Confucianism  (II)  . 

200 

BOOK  X 

XL. 

Canon  (I). 

XLI. 

Canon  (II). 

:|c 

XLII. 

Exposition  of  Canon  (I). 

XLIII. 

Exposition  of  Canon  (II). 

BOOK  XI 

* 

XLIV. 

Major  Illustrations. 

❖ 

XLV. 

Minor  Illustrations. 

XLVI. 

Keng  Chu  

212 

BOOK  xn 

XLVII. 

Esteem  for  Eighteousness  . 

222 

XLVIII. 

Kung  Meng 

230 

BOOK  XIII 

XLIX. 

Lu’s  Question 

243 

L. 

Kung  Shu 

257 

:ie|. 

LI. 

(Title  Lost). 

BOOK  XIV 

it 

LII. 

Fortification  of  the  City  Gate. 

it 

LIII. 

Defence  against  Attack  from  an 

Elevation. 

ie^ 

LIV. 

(Title  Lost). 

X 


CONTENTS 


CHAP. 

LV.  (Title  Lost). 

LVI.  Defence  AOAmsT  Attack  with 
Ladders. 

LVII.  (Title  Lost). 

LVIII.  Pkepabation  against  Inundation. 
LIX.  (Title  Lost). 

LX.  (Title  Lost). 

LXI.  Preparation  against  a Sally. 

LXII.  Preparation  against  Tunnelling. 
LXIII.  Defence  against  Ant-Eush. 


BOOK  XY 


*t  LXIV.  (Title  Lost). 

*t  LXV.  (Title  Lost). 

LXVI.  (Title  Lost). 

*t  LXVII.  (Title  Lost). 

* LXVIII.  The  Sacrifice  against  the  Coming 

OF  the  Enemy. 

* LXIX.  Elags  and  Pennants. 

* LXX.  Commands  and  Orders. 

* LXXL  Miscellaneous  Measures  IN  Defence. 

Index 


* indicates  those  chapters  which  are  omitted  in  the  prea^nt  translation, 
t indicates  those  chapters  the  text  of  which  is  lost. 


PKEFACB 


Every  civilization  has  its  moulders  and  its  spokesmen.  ; 

While  most  recognized  representatives  of  a culture  have  not 
been  without  their  proper  merit,  many  masterly  and  mighty  . 

souls  have  been  allowed  to  sink  into  oblivion.  In  the  case  of 
China,  Fate  played  her  usual  but  tragic  trick.  While  Con- 
fucius s3nnbolizes  to  us  the  blooming  flower  of  Chinese 
thought,  Motse  suggests  but  a faded  blade.  Yet  what  is,  has  ; 

not  always  been.  At  one  time  Moism  with  its  forcefully  : 

stated  doctrines  on  ethics,  politics,  economics,  and  religion  ^ 

seriously  threatened  Confucianism  to  become  the  repre-  ; 

sentative  Chinese  view  of  life  and  way  of  living.  As  a matter  . \ 

of  fact,  Mencius  tells  us  from  his  own  mouth : I am  alarmed  J 

by  these  things  and  address  myself  to  the  defence  of  the  j 

doctrines  of  the  former  sages,  and  to  oppose  Yang  (a  follower  | 

of  Taoism)  and  Mo.’^  Unfortunately  for  the  intellectual 
world,  Confucianism  finally  won  out  through  suppression 
of  its  rival  systems,  including  Moism.  As  a formal  discipline, 

Moism  has  been  left  little  noticed  through  all  these  centuries, 
but  as  an  habitual  way  of  life  it  has  taken  deep  root  in  the 
soil  of  the  nation  and  the  fibre  of  the  people.  The  vitality 
of  the  philosophy  is  further  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  Young 
China  in  her  present  period  of  unrest  is  again  eagerly  turning 
to  her  old  teacher  who  taught  under  rather  similar  conditions 
over  two  millenniums  ago. 

By  way  of  introduction,  we  have  to  be  contented  with 
these  few  words  just  to  bring  out  the  historical  position  and 


PEIFACE 


xii 

the  living  significance  of  otir  author.  The  life  of  the  teacher 
and  the  development  of  Ms. school  wonld.constitiite  a fascina- 
ting romance,  while  the  organisation  of  his . doctrines  would 
make  for  a beautiful  system.  TMs  thrilling  task  and  pleasant 
duty  we  have  tried  to  execute,  and' the  results  are  embodied 
in  a companion  volume,  Motse^  the.  Neglected  Rival  of 
Confucius,  Therefore  further  remarks  could  only  be  made 
at  the  risk  of  tedious  repetition  of  what  we  have  already 
put  very  simply  there  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  distracting 
the  reader’s  attention  from  following  the  pMlosopher  himself 
on  the  other, 

A few  explanations  on  the  translation,  however,  may  not 
be  out  of  place.  Sim  Yi-Jang’s  The  Tforfe  of  Motse  ivith 
Commentaries  is  universally  adjudged  the  best  among  the 
Chinese  texts  of  the  Works,  We  have  based  oux  transla- 
tion on  Ms  text  and  also  our  reading  mainly  on  Ms  com- 
mentaries. The  few  instances  in  wMch  we  have  found  it 
necessary  to  depart  from  his  authority  have  been  indicated 
in  the  footnotes. 

The  exclusion  from  the  translation  of  the  chapters  in  the 
Works  that  do  not  deal  with  ethical  or  political  questions  has 
been  made  both  by  choice  and  by  necessity.  As  a glance  at 
the  Table  of  Contents  ” will  show,  the  chapters  excluded 
belong  to  two  groups,  namely,  the  canonical  chapters  and  their 
supplements  and  the  chapters  on  military  tactics.  The  latter 
group  contain  many  obsolete  terms  and  contribute  little  to 
make  clear  Motse’s  thought.  Regarding  the  former  group, 
besides  the  unsettled  question  as  to  their  respective  author- 
ship, the  few  pages  probably  make  the  hardest  reading  in  the 
whole  body  of  Chinese  literature.  Even  if  one  is  sure  of  the 


PREFACE 


.■xiii, 

meaning  of  their  contents,  which  the  present  translator  does 
not  pretend  to  be,  some  other  method  than  translation  is 
necessary  to  convey  the  meaning  intelligibly.  As  an  excellent 
example  we  might  cite  Professor  Hn  Shih,  who  in  Ms  The 
Develop)ne7it  of  the  Logical  Method  in  Ancient  China ^ attempted 
an  exposition  of  some  of  the  Motion  canons. 

The  traisBlation  has  been  written  quite  independently. 
The  result  has  been  compared  with  the  German  translation  of 
the  complete  Works  by  Professor  Alfred  Forke,  which 
is  the  only  other  extensive  translation  of  Motse  in  a European 
language.  But  on  certain  points,  especially  in  Ms  intro- 
ductory essay,  we  have  to  disagree  with  Ms  authority. 
At  one  stage  in  our  investigation  we  tried  to  state  the 
difierences  of  opinion  in  their  proper  connexions,  but 
later  these  notes  appeared  so  laboured  and  suggestive  of 
controversy  that  we  decided  to  omit  them  altogether. 

Regarding  the  English  of  the  translation,  we  feel  urged  to 
repeat  the  explanation  so  often  employed  by  translators. 
During  the  course  of  our  work  we  have  often  had  to  face  the 
dilemma  between  preserving  the  native  colour  and  expression 
of  the  ancient  Chinese  author  and  employing  modern  idiomatic 
English.  For  evident  reasons  our  decision  has  usually  been 
for  the  former,  sometimes,  perhaps,  at  the  expense  of  the 
latter.  But  we  still  hope  we  have  succeeded  in  presenting  the 
work  in  intelligible  English. 

The  quotations  from  other  works  found  in  tMs  volume 
are  all  translated  from  the  respective  CMnese  texts.  In  the 
case  of  the  numerous  quotations  from  the  Classics,  we 
acknowledge  the  great  pains  taken  by  James  Legge  by  giving 
reference  to  his  translation  of  each  passage,  although  we  have 


xiy 


PREFACE 


very  seldom  been  able  to  adopt  bis  version  without  modifica- 
tion, This  is  done  not  only  that  the  readers  may  be  able 
to  compare  the  different  readings,  but  also  that  they  may 
have  the  opportunity  to  get  a view  of  the  setting  and  signifi- 
cance of  the  passage  where  it  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  foot- 
notes in  this  volume  to  make  clear. 

Besides  my  debt  to  Sun  Yi-Jang  as  indicated  above,  I must 
take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Professor 
Lewis  Hodous  of  Columbia  University,  who  has  patiently 
read  over  the  MSS.  in  their  first  draft,  and  made  numerous 
suggestions.  I have  taken  advantage  of  a number  of  these. 
Dr.  Berthold  Laufer  of  the  Chicago  Field  Museum  has  also 
spent  time  and  given  advice  on  the  translation.  To  Professor 
J.  H.  Tufts  of  the  University  of  Chicago,  that  high-minded 
and  tender-hearted  teacher,  who  not  only  gave  constant 
encouragement  throughout  this  undertaking  but  also  spent 
his  much  needed  vacation  last  Spring  reading  the  MSS., 
I owe  more  than  I can  adequately  express.  Finally  I want 
here  to  show  my  appreciation  of  the  hospitality  extended  to 
me  by  the  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  where  I did 
a large  part  of  this  translation  under  very  favourable 
conditions, 

Y.  P.  Mel 

Londons'. 


July,  1927^ 


BOOK  I 


CHAPTER 

BEMEKDINa  THE  LeABNED  ^ 

If  one  does  not  preserve  the  learned  in  a state  he  will 
be  injuring  the  state ; if  one  is  not  zealous  (to  recommend) 
the  virtuous  upon  seeing  one,  he  will  be  neglecting  the  ruler. 
Enthusiasm  is  to  be  shown  only  to  the  virtuous,  and  plans 
for  the  country  are  only  to  be  shared  with  the  learned.  Few 
are  those,  who,  neglecting  the  virtuous  and  slighting  the 
learned,  could  still  maintain  the  existence  of  their  countries. 

Formerly  Lord  Wen  (of  Chin  780-746  b.c.®)  was  once  in 
exile  and  yet  later  became  the  leading  feudal  lord.  Lord 
Huan  (of  Chh  685-643  b.c.)  was  once  forced  to  leave  his 
state  and  yet  later  became  a tyrant  ” ^ among  the  feudal 
lords.  Lord  Kou  Chien  of  Yiieh  (496-465  b.c.)  was  once  brought 
under  humiliation  by  the  king  of  Wu  and  yet  he  was  later 

^ This  and  the  two  following  chapters  are  judged  to  be  spurious  almost 
unanimously  by  competent  textual  critics.  The  content  of  this  chapter 
is  nothing  more  than  an  appendix  to  the  three  synoptic  chapters  VIII-X 
on*‘  Exaltatioh  or  the  Virtuous’',  and  should  not,  therefore,  occupy 
the  position  of  the  opening  chapter  in  the  book. 

® The  English  word  “ learned  **  is  no  equivalent  to  the  Chinese  word 
shih  as  virtue,  talent,  and  courage  are  to  be  embodied  by  the  shih  as 
well  as  learning.  He  is  really  a philosopher-gentleman  of  the  noblesse 
of  the  sword. 

® All  dates  so  inserted  indicate  the  period  of  the  reign  of  the  ruler, 

^ Tyrant ^ is  here  used  in  the  Greek  sense.  See  the  Chronological 
Table  appended  in  the  companion  volume,  Motsef  the  Neglected  Rival  of 
Confucius. 

^ The  reference  here  is  to  Lord  Eu  Ch’a  of  Wu,  495-473  b.c. 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


2 

looked  upon  with  awe  by  the  princes  of  CHna.^  The  reason 
that  these  three  men  became  famous  and  successful  in  the 
world  lies  in  that  they  were  able  to  endure  shame  and  humilia- 
tion within  their  states,- 

The  greatest  men  know  of  no  defeat.  The  next  greatest 
turn  failure  into  success,  and  this,  by  the  employment  of 
the  people. 

I have  heard  it  said : It  is  not  that  there  is  no  peaceful 
abode  but  that  I have  no  peaceful  heart  (over  others’  home- 
lessness) ; it  is  not  that  my  wealth  is  not  siifiicient  but  that 
my  passion  yearns  for  more  (to  improve  others’  conditions). 
Therefore  the  superior  man  is  strict  with  one’s  self  but  lenient 
with  others  (in  matters  of  conduct)  while  the  multitude 
are  lenient  with  themselves  but  strict  with  others.  The 
superior  man  carries  out  Hs  ambitions  successfully  in  action 
and  studies  the  situation  when  he  is  at  leisure.  Even  when 
he  is  taken  as  a mediocre  individual  he  feels  no  dissatisfaction. 
This  is  because  he  has  self-confidence.  Therefore,  those  who 
attempt  what  seems  difficult  to  them  -will  obtain  what  they 
desire,  but  few  who  aim  at  what  they  desire  can  avoid  what 
they  dislike,^ 

Therefore,  artful  ministers  are  harmful  to  the  lord  and 
flattering  subordinates  are  injurious  to  the  ruler.  The  lord 
should  have  uncompromising  ministers ; the  ruler  should 
have  stern  subordinates.  Only  when  counsel  is  given  with 
far-sightedness  and  advice  administered  with  sternness, 

^ yueii  was  on  the  southern,  border  of  China.  It  was  barbarian  in 
origin  too.  Cf.  the  Sketch  Map  appended  in  Motse,  the  Neglected  Bival 
0/  Oo7ifucius. 

^ This  is  almost  an  anticipation  of  the  modern  criticism  of  the  Hedonistic 
Paradox, 


BEFEIENDING  THE  LEARNED 


3 


can  tlie  life  of  the  state  be  secure  and  permanent.  If  (to 
the  contrary)  the  subordinates  should  value  their  positions 
and  keep  silence,  the  ministers  near  at  hand  would  be  speech- 
less and  those  far  away  could  only  sigh,  and  the  people  would 
become  bitter.  When  the  ruler  is  surrounded  with  praises 
and  flatteries  and  insulated  against  good  counsels,  then  the 
country  is  in  danger.  Was  it  not  because  they  would  not 
employ  the  scholars,  that  Chieh^  and  Chow^  lost  their 
empire  and  their  lives  ? Thus  it  is  said  : To  offer  the  greatest 
treasure  of  the  country  to  the  ruler  is  not  as  laudable  as 
to  recommend  the  virtuous  and  introduce  the  learned. 

Among  the  five  weapons  the  sharpest  will  be  broken  first. 
Among  the  five  swords  the  keenest  will  be  first  worn  out. 
The  sweet  wells  become  sooner  dry  and  the  elegant  trees 
are  oftener  felled.  The  tortoises  that  are  more  responsive 
are  oftener  burned  and  the  snakes  that  show  more  magic 
power  are  more  sacrificed.  Thus,  Pi  Kan  ^ died  of  his  up- 
rightness ; Meng  Pen  ^ perished  by  his  strength  ; Hsi  Shih  ^ 

^ Chieh  was  the  last  king  of  Hsia  Dynasty,  1818-1766  B.c. 

^ Chow  was  the  last  king  of  Shang  Dynasty,  1164-1122  B.c. 

® Pi  Kan  was  a royal  uncle  of  the  wicked  King  Chow.  He  was  so 
daring  in  his  counsels  that  Chow  tortured  him  to  death. 

^ Meng  Fen  was  a man  of  great  strength.  He  was  said  to  have  plucked 
the  horns  out  of  oxen's  heads.  But,  chronologically,  he  belongs  to  the 
end  of  the  fourth  century  b.c.,  and  Motse  could  not  be  still  living  to  know 
him.  The  ready  explanation  is  that  this  incident  was  inserted  by  a later 
writer.  But,  as  was  pointed  out  in  the  note  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter, 
the  text  of  this  and  the  next  two  chapters  has  been  so  much  tampered 
with  that  it  is  hardly  worth  the  effort  to  try  to  account  for  every  incongruity. 

^ Hsi  Shih  was  a famous  beauty  of  the  fifth  century  b.c.  Lord  Kou 
Ohien  of  Yueh  made  a present  of  her  to  Lord  Fu  Ch*a  of  Wu  who  were 
military  rivals.  Fu  Ch^a  could  not  resist  her  charms  and  Wu  dissipated. 
Wu  was  soon  after  absorbed  by  Yueh. 


4 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


paid  with  her  life  for  her  beauty ; and  Wu  Ch"i  ^ was  tom 
alive  for  his  acHevemeat.  This  shows  that  there  are  but 
few  who  excel  other  people  and  do  not  perish  on  account 
of  it.  Hence  the  saying : Position  of  the  supreme  is  hard 
to  keep. 

Even  the  kind  ruler  will  not  show  favours  to  ministers 
without  merit.  Even  the  aSectionate  father  will  not  love 
his  useless  sons.  He  who  occupies  a position  but  is  not 
equal  to  the  task  is  not  the  proper  person  for  the  position. 
He  who  draws  emoluments  but  does  not  deserve  the  ranlc  is 
not  the  proper  proprietor  of  the  emoluments.  Good  bows 
may  be  hard  to  draw,  but  they  can  reach  great  heights  and 
pierce  deeply.  Good  horses  may  be  hard  to  ride  on,  but 
they  can  carry  heavy  burdens  and  make  long  journeys. 
Real  talents  may  be  hard  to  command,  but  they  can  be 
trusted  to  be  envoys  to  the  court  of  the  emperor  and  to  meet 
the  nobility. 

Therefore  the  big  rivers  do  not  despise  the  little  brooklete 
for  tributaries.  And  great  men  do  not  neglect  any  menial 
task  or  reject  any  triSe,  and  so  they  become  vessels  for  the 
world.  The  water  in  a river  does  not  come  from  a single 
source,  neither  is  the  fur  coat  that  is  worth  a thousand  yi  ^ 

^ Wu  Oh’i  was  a great  general  of  the  State  of  Ch’u,  one  of  the  most  feared 
military  men  of  the  period.  King  Tao,  the  reigning  ruler  of  Ch’u  and  master 
of  Wu  ChM,  died  in  381  b.o.  Wu  Ch’i  was  thereupon  cruelly  put  to  death 
hy  his  fellow  ministers,  who  had  been  envying  his  glory  and  honour.  It  is 
quite  doubtful,  however,  whether  Motse  could  have  lived  to  see  this  event. 
See  the  discussion  on  the  dates  of  Motse  in  MoUe,  ike  Neglected  Rival  of 
GonfuciuSf  chap.  ii. 

* Yi  is  an  ancient  measure  of  silver.  It  is  sometimes  given  as 
equivalent  to  20  taels  and  sometimes  as  24. 


BEPEIENDING  THE  LEARNED 


5 


:coBiposeci:  of  tte  white  fmr  ^ of  a single  fox.  Now,  to  discard 
those  who  agree  with  the  right  but  employ  those  who  agree 
with  one  s self  is  not  the  way  to  be  a great  ruler.  (Just 
as)  Heaven  and  earth  do  not  dazzle,  great  bodies  of  water 
do  not  boil  and  foam,  and  great  conflagrations  do  not  coruscate, 
(so)  the  imperial  character  does  not  lift  itself  up  beyond 
reach. 

As  to  the  chieftain  of  only  a thousand  people,  he  is  straight 
like  an  arrow  and  smooth  like  a hone,  unable  to  tolerate  the 
manifold  ways.  For  narrow  gorges  dry  up  rapidly,  shallow 
streams  are  soon  exhausted,  and  the  barren  land  does  not 
bear  fruits.  When  a ruler  confines  his  favours  within  his 
palace,  then  they  cannot  be  shared  by  the  whole  country. 

^ This  is  the  part  of  the  fur  of  the  fox  that  comes  from  under  its  legs. 
It  is  both  light  and  warm. 


CHAPTER  II 

Self-Cultivatiok 

Though  there  should  be  tactics  in  war,  courage  is  fuada- 
mentai.  Though  there  should  be  ceremonies  for  mourning, 
grief  is  essential  Though  a scholar  should  be  learned,  he 
must  first  of  all  exhibit  good  conduct.  When  the  seeds  are 
not  well  sown,  there  is  no  use  in  labouring  for  a good  har^^est. 
When  the  people  near-by  are  not  befriended  there  is  no  use 
of  endeavouring  to  attract  those  at  a distance.  When  one's 
relatives  are  not  submissive,  there  is  no  use  in  endeavouring 
to  establish  contacts  with  the  outside  world.  When  one 
cannot  accomplish  a single  task  from  beginning  to  end, 
there  is  no  use  of  attempting  many  things.  And  when  one 
is  ignorant  of  a commonplace  that  is  pointed  out,  there  is 
no  use  of  pursuing  wide  knowledge. 

Therefore,  when  the  early  kings  administered  the  empire, 
they  would  investigate  what  was  within  reach  and  attract 
those  at  a distance.  Investigation  of  a locality  by  the 
superior  men  means  its  orderly  government.  When  they 
discovered  misconduct  or  depravity,  they  corrected  them- 
selves. Thus  all  complaints  disappeared  and  conduct  became 
regulated  (by  itself).  When  the  superior  men  do  not  listen 
to  treacherous  words  or  utter  any  threatening  soimd,  or 
entertain  any  idea  of  injuring  somebody,  then  even  if  there 
were  underhanded  persons  they  would  lose  support.  There- 
fore the  superior  men  are  daily  more  energetic  in  performing 
their  duty,  but  weaker  in  their  desires,  and  more  stately 
in  their  appearance. 


SELF-CULTIVATION 


T 


The  way  of  tlie  superior  man  makes  the  individual 
incorruptible  in  poverty  and  righteous  when  wealthy;  it 
makes  him  love  the  living  and  mourn  the  dead.  These 
four  qualities  of  conduct  cannot  be  hypocritically  embodied 
in  one's  personality.  There  is  nothing  in  his  mind  that  goes 
beyond  love ; there  is  nothing  in  his  behaviour  that  goes 
beyond  respectfulness,  and  there  is  nothing  from  his  mouth 
that  goes  beyond  gentility.  When  one  pursues  such  a way 
until  it  pervades  his  four  limbs  and  permeates  his  flesh  and 
skin,  and  until  he  becomes  white-haired  and  bald-headed 
without  ceasing,  one  is  truly  a sage. 

His  wisdom  will  not  be  far-reaching  whose  purpose  is 
not  firm.  His  action  will  not  be  efiective  whose  promises 
are  not  kept.  He  who  will  not  share  his  possessions  with 
others  is  not  worthy  to  be  a friend.  And  he  who  does  not 
stand  firm  on  principles  and  has  neither  wide  knowledge  nor 
penetrating  judgment,  is  not  worthy  to  be  a companion. 
Just  as  a weak  trunk  will  have  but  small  branches,  so  mere 
bravery  without  cultivation  will  result  in  dissipation.  And 
just  as  a dirty  source  will  issue  in  an  impure  stream,  so 
unfaithful  conduct  will  unfavourably  affect  one’s  fame. 
For,  fame  does  not  spring  up  out  of  nothing,  nor  does  praise 
grow  by  itself.  Fame  follows  upon  success  and  is  not 
obtainable  by  hypocrisy. 

He  will  not  be  listened  to  who  talks  much  but  is  slow 
in  action,  even  though  he  is  discerning.  He  will  not 
accomplish  anything  who  is  capable  but  likes  to  boast  of 
his  feats,  even  though  he  drudges.  The  wise  discerns  all 
in  his  mind  but  speaks  simply,  and  he  is  capable  but  does 
not  boast  of  his  deeds.  And,  so,  his  name  is  exalted  the  world 


8 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

over.  In  speech,  not  quantity  but  ingenuity,  not  eloquence 
but  insight,  should  be  cultivated.  If  one  is  not  wise  and 
without  insight,  breeding  only  dissipation  in  one's  personality, 
this  is  just  the  contrary  of  what  should  be  cultivated. 

Any  virtue  that  does  not  spring  from  the  heart  will  not 
remain  and  any  (result  of)  action  that  is  not  aimed  at  by 
one's  self  will  not  stay.  There  is  no  short  cut  to  fame  and 
there  is  no  trick  to  praise.  The  superior  man  regards  his 
body  but  as  the  vehicle  for  his  character.  Kone  who  places 
much  importance  on  personal  gains  but  lightly  sacrifices 
his  fame  has  ever  become  a gentleman  in  the  world. 


CHAPTER  HI 

On  Dyeing  ^ 

Watcliing  a dyer  of  silk  at  work,  Motse  sigked,  saying  ; 
Wiiat  is  dyed  in  blue  becomes  blue,  wbat  is  dyed  in  yellow 
becomes  yellow.  When  the  silk  is  put  in  a difierent  dye, 
its  colour  becomes  also  different.  Having  been  dipped  in 
five  times,  it  has  changed  its  colour  five  times.  Therefore 
dyeing  should  be  done  with  great  care.  This  is  true  not 
only  with  silk  dyeing ; even  a country  changes  its  colour 
in  response  to  its  influences.^ 

Thus  Shun  came  under  the  influences  of  Hsii  Yu^  and 
Po  Yang  ^ ; Yii,  under  that  of  Kao  T’ao  ^ and  Po  Yi  ^ ; 
T’ang,  under  that  of  Yi  Yin  ^ and  Chung  Huei  ^ ; and  King 
Wu,  under  that  of  the  Grand  Duke^  and  Duke  Chou.^ 
Now  these  four  kings  had  been  under  good  influences.  There- 
fore they  came  to  possess  the  empire  and  were  commissioned 
Sons  of  Heaven  (Emperors).^  Their  achievements  and  great 
fame  extended  from  Heaven  to  earth.  And  when  the  pre- 
eminently magnanimous  and  righteous  figures  of  the  world 
are  mentioned,  they  are  invariably  those  referred  to. 

^ Many  historical  figures  cited  in  this  chapter  lived  long  after  the  time 
of  Motse.  Ail  that  can  be  attributed  to  Motse  in  this  chapter  is  that 
watching  some  dyer  at  work  he  was  impressed  by  the  powerfulness  of 
the  dyes. 

^ There  is  a pun  in  the  Chinese  word  jan  It  means,  among  other 
things,  to  dye  and  also  to  influence. 

^ These  are  the  noted  virtuous  men  in  ancient  Chinese  history. 

^ In  Chinese  the  same  term  T’ien  Tse,  ^ literally  Son  of  Heaven, 
means  also  the  Emperor.  The  former  gives  the  religious  while  the  latter 
the  political  emphasis.  This  double  character  of  the  term  also  expresses 
the  Chinese  political  idea  of  the  government  as  a trust  from  Heaven. 


10 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


CMeh.  of  Hsia  came  under  the  influence  of  Kan  Hsin^ 
and  T’uei  Yi  ^ ; Chow  of  Yin,  under  that  of  the  Duke  of 
Gh'ungi  and  1 Lai^ ; King  Li,  under  that  of  Chhng  Fu, 
Duke  Li  and  Yi  Chung  of  the  State  of  Jung  i ; and  King 
Yu,  under  that  of  Yi,  Duke  of  FuJ  and  Ku,  Duke  of  Ta’aiJ 
Now  these  four  kings  had  been  under  bad  influences.  There- 
fore they  lost  their  empire  and  their  lives,  and  were  persecuted 
everywhere.  And  when  the  most  unrighteous  and  shameful 
persons  of  the  world  are  mentioned,  they  are  invariably 
those  referred  to. 

Lord  Huan  of  Ch’i  came  under  the  influence  of  Kuan 
Chung  * and  Pao  Shu  ® ; Lord  Wen  of  Chin,  under  that  of 
Uncle  Fan  2 and  Kao  Yen  2;  Lord  Chuang  of  Ch’u,  under 
that  of  Sun  Shu  ^ and  the  Minister  of  Shen  ^ ; Ho  Lu  of  Wu, 
under  that  of  Wu  Yuan  ^ and  Wen  Yi  ^ ; and  Kou  Chien 
of  Yueh,  under  that  of  Pan  Li  ^ and  Minister  Chimg.^  Now 
these  five  lords  had  been  under  good  influences.  Therefore 
they  became  Tyrants®  among  the  feudal  lords  and  their 
achievements  and  their  fame  were  handed  down  to  posterity. 

Fan  Chi  She  came  under  the  influence  of  Ch’ang  Liu  Shuo  ^ 
and  Wang  Sheng  « ; Chung  Hsing  Yin,  under  that  of  Chi 
Ch’in*  and  Kao  Chiang^  Pu  Ch’a.  under  that  of  Wang 
Sun  Lo  * and  Minister  P’i « ; Chih  Po  Yao,  under  that  of 


These  are  the  noted  wicked  men  in  ancient  Chinese  historj-,  assistants 
° accomplices  with  them  in  sin  and  cruelty. 

These  are  the  able  assistants  to  the  great  feudal  lords  of  the  period 
WHO  are  mstrumental  to  the  latter’s  success. 

thi  ^ comparison  with  the  list  of 

Chronological  Table  appended  in  Motse,  the 
Neglected  Stval  of  Confwi'usvnn  show  that  the  use  of  the  word  here  is  not 
JdListoncaily  strict. 

* These  are  the  wicked  helpers  of  the  unsuccessfui  princes. 


ON  DYIING 


11 


Chill  Kuo  ^ and  Chang  Wu  ^ ; Shang  of  Chung  Shan,  under 
that  of  Wei  Yi  ^ and  Yen  Ch'ang  ^ ; and  Lord  K'ang  of  Sung, 
under  that  of  T'ang  Yang  and  Tien  Pu  Li.^  Now,  these 
six  princes  had  been  under  bad  influences.  Therefore  their 
states  were  ruined  and  they  were  executed,  their  ancestral 
temples  were  destroyed  and  descendants  annihilated.  The 
rulers  and  the  subjects  were  dispersed  and  the  people  were 
left  homeless.  The  whole  world  point  to  these  six  princes 
as  the  most  greedy  and  disturbing  people. 

Now,  how’  can  the  rulers  obtain  security  ? They  can 
obtain  it  by  following  the  right  way.  And  one  will  naturally 
follow  the  right  way  when  under  good  influence.  There- 
fore capable  rulers  are  very  painstaking  in  the  selection  of 
men  while  they  may  not  be  so  careful  in  attending  to  the 
administration  (themselves).  But  the  incapable  wear  out 
their  body  and  exhaust  their  energy,  tax  their  mind  and  stretch 
their  thought,  and  yet  their  states  are  only  placed  in  greater 
danger  and  their  persons  under  more  humiliation.  Now, 
it  is  not  that  these  six  princes  do  not  value  their  states  or 
hold  their  lives  cheap,  it  is  really  that  they  do  not  understand 
the  relative  importance  of  things.  And  it  is  due  to  bad 
influences  that  their  idea  of  importance  is  distorted. 

Not  only  states  but  also  individuals  are  subject  to 
influences.  If  one  has  for  friends  none  but  those  who  love 
magnanimity  and  righteousness  and  who  are  careful  and 
respectful  of  course  one’s  family  will  become  more  prosperous, 
one’s  person  more  at  peace,  and  one’s  name  more  honourable 
every  day  ; and,  as  an  oflflcial,  one  will  be  properly  qualified. 


^ These  are  the  wicked  helpers  of  the  unsuccessful  princes. 


Examples  of  sucli  are  Tuan  Kan  Mu,^  CKintse,®  and  Pu 
Yiieh.*  (On  the  contrary)  if  one  has  for  friends  none  but 
those  who  are  proud  and  quarrelsome  and  who  pretend 
to  be  intimate,  naturally  one’s  family  will  be  reduced  to 
straits,  one’s  person  will  be  more  in  danger,  and  one’s  name 
: ‘ mote  dishonourable  every  day  and  one  will  not  be  quaMed 

for  office.  And,  examples  of  such  are  Tse  HsL  Yi  Ya,  and 

. StoTiso, 

An  Ode*  says : “ One  must  choose  what  to  be  tinged  with.” 
To  be  careful  about  what  one  is  to  be  tinged  with  is  just 
the  theme  of  this  (essay). 

" Tu^  Kan  Mu  was  a pupU  of  Tse  Hsia,  who  was  a noted  disciple  of 


v/ODiucms* 

^ Ch’intse  was  a disciple  of  Motse.  Infra,  pp.  21S  and  239. 

» Fu  Yueh  is  a great  virtnons  man.  For  full  story  see  p.  43,  note  3. 


THE  WORKS  OP  MOTSE 


CHAPTER  IV  ^ 

Oh  the  Necessity  .oe  Stahdaeds 

Motse  said  : To  accomplish  anjrthing  whatsoever  one  must 
have  standards.  None  has  yet  accomplished  anything  without 
them.  The  gentlemen  fulfilling  their  duties  as  generals 
and  councillors  have  their  standards.  Even  the  artisans 
performing  their  tasks  also  have  their  standards.  The 
artisans  make  square  objects  according  to  the  square,  circular 
objects  according  to  the  compasses;  they  draw  straight 
lines  with  the  carpenter’s  line  and  find  the  perpendicular 
by  a pendulum.  All  artisans,  whether  skilled  or  unskilled, 
employ  these  five^  standards.  Only,  the  skilled  workers 
are  accurate.  Though  the  unskilled  labourers  have  not 
attained  accuracy,  yet  they  do  better  by  followiag  these 
standards  than  otherwise.  Thus  all  artisans  follow  the 
standards  in  their  work. 

Now,  the  government  of  the  empire  and  that  of  the  large 
states  do  not  observe  their  standards.  This  shows  the 
governors  are  even  less  intelligent  than  the  artisans. 

What,  then,  should  be  taken  as  the  proper  standard  m 
government?  How  will  it  do  for  everybody  to  imitate^ 

1 This  chapter  seems  to  be  an  appendix  or  summary  of  the  central  themes 
in  chapters  xiv-xvi  on  ^"Ukivebsal  Love  *'  and  chapters  xxvi-viii  on 

Will  or  Hevaen 

^ Only  four  are  mentioned  above.  In  the  *'K’ao  Kitng  Om'’  in  Chou 
^ M ^ f B ifawuaZ  on  Grafts,  a fifth  standard  is  specified 

which  is  somehow  here  omitted,  namely  **  find  the  level  with  water 

^ Here  in  Chinese  the  same  word  for  standard ''  ^ is  used.  The 
more  literal  translation  will  be  “ take  as  standard  But  as  it  will  be  often 
repeated  in  the  subseqnent  text,  this  is  too  clumsy. 


14 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


Ms  parents  ? There  are  numerous  parents  in  the  world 
but  few  are  magnanimous.  For  everybody  to  imitate  Ms 
parents  is  to  imitate  the  unmagnanimous.  Imitating  the 
unmagnanimous  can  not  be  said  to  be  following  the  proper 
standard.  How  will  it  do  for  everybody  to  follow  his  teacher  ? 
There  are  numerous  teachers  in  the  world  but  few  are 
magnanimous.  For  everybody  to  imitate  his  teacher  is 
to  imitate  the  unmagnanimous.  Imitating  the  un- 
magnanimous cannot  be  taken  as  following  the  proper 
standard.  How  will  it  do  for  everybody  to  imitate  his  ruler  ? 
There  are  many  rulers  in  the  world  but  few  are  magnanimous. 
For  everybody  to  imitate  the  ruler  is  to  imitate  the 
unmagnanimous.  Imitating  the  iinmagnanimous  cannot 
be  taken  as  following  the  right  standard.  So  then  neither 
the  parents  nor  the  teacher  nor  the  ruler  should  be  accepted 
as  the  standard  in  government. 

What  then  should  be  taken  as  the  standard  in  government  ? 
Nothing  better  than  following  Heaven.  Heaven  is  all- 
inclusive  and  impartial  in  its  activities,  abundant  and 
unceasing  in  its  blessings,  and  lasting  and  imtiring  in  its 
guidance.  And,  so,  when  the  sage-kings  had  accepted  Heaven 
as  their  standard,  they  measured  every  action  and  enterprise 
by  Heaven.  W“hat  Heaven  desired  they  would  carry  out, 
what  Heaven  abominated  they  refrained  from. 

Now,  what  is  it  that  Heaven  desires,  and  what  that  it 
abominates  ? Certainly  Heaven  desires  to  have  men  benefit 
and  love  one  another  and  abominates  to  have  them  hate  and 
harm  one  another.  How  do  we  know  that  Heaven  desires 
to  have  men  love  and  benefit  one  another  and  abominates 
to  have  them  hate  and  harm  one  another  ? Because  it 


ON  THE  NECESSITY  OF  ' STANDAEDS  15 


lo¥es  and  benefits  men  universally.  How  do  we  know  that 
it  loves  and  benefits  men  universally  ? Because  it  claims 
all  and  accepts  offerings  from  all.  All  states  in  tlie  world, 
large  or  small,  are  cities  of  Heaven,  and  all  people  young 
or  old,  honourable  or  humble,  are  its  subjects  ; for  they 
ail  graze  oxen  and  sheep,  feed  dogs  and  pigs,  and  prepare 
clean  wine  and  cakes  ^ to  sacrifice  to  Heaven.  Does  this 
not  mean  that  Heaven  claims  all  and  accepts  offerings  from 
all  ? Since  Heaven  does  claim  all  and  accepts  offerings  from 
all,  what  then  can  make  us  say  that  it  does  not  desire  men 
to  love  and  benefit  one  another  ? Hence  those  who  love  and 
benefit  others  Heaven  will  bless.  Those  who  hate  and  harm 
others  Heaven  will  curse,  for  it  is  said  that  he  who  murders 
the  innocent  will  be  visited  by  misfortune.  How  else  can 
we  explain  the  fact  that  men,  murdering  each  other,  will  be 
cursed  by  Heaven  ? Thus  we  are  certain  that  Heaven 
desires  to  have  men  love  and  benefit  one  another  and 
abominates  to  have  them  hate  and  harm  one  another. 

The  ancient  sage-kings,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu^  loved 
the  people  of  the  world  universally,  leading  them  to  reverence 
Heaven  and  worship  the  spirits.  Many  were  their  benefits 
to  the  people.  And,  thereupon  Heaven  blessed  them, 
establishing  them  emperors  ; and  all  the  feudal  lords  of  the 
empire  showed  them  respect.  (On  the  other  hand)  the  wicked 


1 These  sacrificial  cakes  are  to  be  of  a particular  description,  namely, 
to  be  made  of  millet  and  glutinous  rice, 

2 These  are  the  famous  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  namely, 
Hsia,  Shang,  and  Chou.  See  the  Chronological  Table  appended  in  Mctse, 
the  Neglected  Rival  of  Confucius,  for  their  dates  and  historical  setting. 


16 


THl  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


kings,  CSbieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,^  hated  all  the  people  in 
the  world,  seducing  the  people  to  curse  Heaven  and  ridicule 
the  spirits.  Great  were  their  injuries  to  the  people.  There- 
upon Heaven  brought  them  calamity,  depriving  them  of  their 
empire  and  their  lives ; and  posterity  condemned  them 
to  this  day.  Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,  then,  are  those  that 
committed  evil  and  were  visited  by  calamities.  And,  Yii, 
T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wii  are  those  that  loved  and  benefited 
the  people  and  obtained  blessings.  Thus  we  have  those 
who  obtained  blessings  because  they  loved  and  benefited 
the  people  as  well  as  those  who  were  visited  by  calamities 
because  they  hated  and  harmed  the  people. 

^ These  wicked  men  were  the  descendants  of  the  sage-kings,  Yh,  T’ang, 
Wen,  and  Wu  respectively,  and  the  last  kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties  just 
as  the  latter  were  the  first  kings  of  them.  See  Chronological  Table  referred 
to  in  the  last  footnote. 


CHAPTEE  V 1 

The  Seven  Causes  of  Anxiety 
Motse  said : There  are  seven  causes  of  worry  to  a state 
and  they  are : (1)  When  the  outer  and  the  inner  city  walls 
are  not  defensible ; (2)  When  an  enemy  state  is  approaching 
and  yet  one’s  neighbours  do  not  come  to  the  rescue ; (3)  When 
the  resources  of  the  people  have  all  been  spent  on  useless 
enterprises  and  gifts  all  squandered  upon  incapable  men, 
when  people’s  resources  are  exhausted  without  producing 
any  profit  and  the  treasury  is  emptied  by  entertaining  idle 
company;  (4)  When  the  officials  value  only  their  salaries, 
and  the  sophists  ^ only  friendship,  and  when  the  subordinates 
dare  not  remonstrate  against  the  laws  the  ruler  has  made  for 
persecution ; (5)  When  the  lord  is  over-confident  of  his  own 
wisdom  and  holds  no  consultation,  when  he  feels  he  is  secure 
and  makes  no  preparations  against  attack,  and  when  he  does 
not  know  that  he  must  be  watchful  while  neighbours  are 
planning  against  him ; (6)  When  those  trusted  are  not  loyal 
and  the  loyal  are  not  trusted  ; and  (7)  W^hen  the  crops  are 
not  sufficient  for  food  and  the  ministers  can  not  be  charged 
with  responsibihties,  and  when  awards  fail  to  make  people 
happy  and  punishment  to  make  them  afraid.  With  these 
seven  causes  present  in  the  maintenance  of  the  state,  the 

^ This  and  the  next  chapters  seem  to  be  supplements  to  chapters  xx-xxii, 
on  “ Economy  of  Expendituees 

^ There  is  some  remarkable  similarity  between  the  Greek  sophist  and  the 
Chinese  yu  k'o,  ^ In  both  cases  they  started  to  be  travelling  teachers 

of  wisdom,  including  the  art  of  rhetoric  and  statecraft,  but  degenerated 
into  jugglers  of  words  or  even  worse,  Cf.  Motse,  the  Neglected  Rival  of 
Confucius,  chap.  i. 


c 


18 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTS! 


State  will  perish,  and,  in  the  defence  of  a city,  the  city 
will  be  reduced  to  ruin  by  the  approaching  enemy.  Where- 
ever  these  seven  causes  are  found,  the  country  will  face 
calamity. 

Now,  the  five  grains  ^ are  the  people's  mainstay  and  the 
source  of  the  ruler’s  revenue.  When  the  people  lose  their 
support  the  ruler  cannot  have  any  revenue  either.  And 
without  food  the  people  will  not  observe  order.  Therefore, 
food  should  be  secured,  land  cultivated  and  espenditures 
cut  down.  ■\^Tien  all  the  five  grains  are  gathered,  all  the 
five  tastes  2 will  be  offered  the  ruler  ; when  not  all  gathered, 
the  five  tastes  will  not  be  all  offered. 

Failure  of  one  grain  is  called  dearth  ^ ; failure  of  two 
grains  is  called  scarcity  ^ ; failure  of  three  grains  is  called 
cakmity  m I failure  of  four  grains  is  called  want  ^ ; and 

failure  of  all  five  grains  is  caUed  famine  When  the  country 

is  in  dearth,  all  the  salaries  of  the  officials  below  the  rank 
of  the  minister  will  be  reduced  by  one-fifth ; in  scarcity, 
they  will  be  reduced  by  two-fifths ; in  calamity,  they  will 
be  reduced  by  three-fifths;  in  want,  they  will  be  reduced  by 
four-fifths ; and  when  famine  is  in  the  country  there  will 
be  no  salaries  beyond  their  rations.  Therefore  when  famine 
and  dearth  visit  a country,  the  ruler  will  omit  three  from 
the  five  items  of  sacrifice,  the  officials  will  suspend  the  courts, 
and  the  scholars  will  not  go  to  school  and  the  lord  will 
not  put  on  his  robe  to  give  audience.  Even  envoys  from  other 

(3)  millet  of  a different 

variety,  (4)  wheat,  and  (5)  soy  beans. 

tast^  include  bitter,  hot,  sour,  sweet,  and  salty.  But 
openly  it  is  used  figuratively,  signifying  elaborate  cooking  and  sumptuous 


19 


THE  SEVEN  CAUSES  OF  ANXIETY 

feudal  lords  and  messengers  from,  neighbouring  states  are 
entertained  with  cooked  food  only,  and  it  is  not  sumptuous. 
The  side-horses  of  the  carriage-team  are  done  awaj^  with 
and  the  walks  (in  the  palace)  are  not  weeded.  Neither  are 
the  horses  fed  with  grains,  nor  are  the  concubines  and  maids 
clothed  with  silk.  And  this  is  the  sign  of  extreme  scarcity- 

Now,  if  carrying  her  child  and  drawing  water  from  a 
well,  a woman  dropped  the  child  into  the  well,  she  would  of 
course  endeavour  to  get  it  out.  But  famine  and  dearth  is 
a much  greater  calamity  than  the  dropping  of  a child.  Should 
there  not  be  also  endeavour  (to  prevent  it)  ? People  are 
gentle  and  kind  when  the  year  is  good,  but  selfish  and  vicious 
when  it  is  bad.  Yet,  how  can  they  be  held  responsible  ? 
When  many  produce  but  few  consume  then  there  can  be  no 
bad  year ; on  the  contrary,  when  few  produce  but  many 
consume  then  there  can  be  no  good  year.  Thus  it  is  said : 
scarcity  of  supply  should  stimulate  study  of  the  seasons  and 
want  of  food  demands  economy  of  expenditures. 

The  ancients  produced  wealth  according  to  seasons.  They 
ascertained  the  source  of  wealth  before  they  appropriated 
the  products,  and  therefore  they  had  plenty.  Could  even 
the  ancient  sage-kings  cause  the  five  grains  invariably  to 
ripen  and  be  harvested  and  the  floods  and  the  droughts 
never  to  occur  ? Yet,  none  were  frozen  or  starved,  why 
was  it  ? It  was  because  they  made  full  use  of  the  seasons 
and  were  frugal  in  their  own  maintenance.  The  history 
of  Hsia  says  that  the  Deluge  lasted  seven  years  in  the  time 
of  Yli  and  the  history  of  Yin^  tells  that  a drought  visited 

^ Yin  is  a second  name  for  the  Dynasty  of  Shang.  Of.  Motse,  the 
Neglected  Rival  of  Confucius,  chap.  i. 


20 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSl 


T’ang  for  five  yeare.  These  are  the  extremes  of  disasters. 
Yet  the  people  were  not  frozen  or  starved.  Why  was  this 
so?  The  reason  lies  in  diligent  production  and  thrifty 
consumption.  Therefore,  famine  and  dearth  cannot  be 
prepared  against  unless  there  are  stored  grains  in  the  granaries, 
and  justice  cannot  be  maintained  against  the  unjust  unless 
there  are  ready  weapons  in  the  armoury.  One  cannot  defend 
himself  unless  the  inner  and  the  outer  city  walls  are  in  repair, 
and  one  cannot  meet  emergencies  unless  his  ideas  are  well’ 
thought  out.  Thus  Ch’ing  Chi  i was  unprepared,  and  he  should 
not  have  set  out  on  the  journey.  Chieh  made  no  preparations 
against  T’ang  and  he  was  sent  to  exile.  And  Chow  made 
^ preparations  against  Wu  and  he  was  executed.  Now 
Ckeh  and  Chow  were  both  emperors  in  ranh  and  possessed  the 
whole  empire,  yet  they  both  perished  at  the  hands  of  rulers 
(of  states)  of  only  a hundred  li  2 square.  What  is  the  reason 
or  this  . Because  they  depended  on  their  rank  and  wealth 
and  made  no  preparations.  Therefore,  preparation  is  what 
a country  should  emphasize.  Supply  is  the  treasure  of  a 
country,  armament  its  claws,  and  the  city  walls  are  the 
stronghold  of  its  self-defence.  And  these  three  items  are 
tile  essentials  to  the  existence  of  a state. 

(The  present  rulers)  squander  great  amounts  of  wealth 
to  reward  the  undeserving,  empty  the  treasury  to  acquire 
callages  and  horses,  exhaust  the  labourers  to  build  palaces 
and  furmsh  amusements.  Upon  their  death,  again,  thick 
coffins  and  many  coats  and  fur  coats  are  to  be  furnished. 

it  1 

» A U B i.  .11.  to  and  was  murdered  on  the  wav. 

A 11  ^ IS  equal  to  approximately  J mile. 


THE  SEVEN  CAUSES  OF  ANXIETY 


21 


Porciies  and  pavilions  are  built  for  them  while  they  are  living, 
and  tombs  when  they  are  dead.  By  this  the  people  are 
embittered  and  the  treasury  is  left  lean.  While  the  amuse- 
ments are  not  yet  satisfying  to  the  superiors,  the  hardship 
already  becomes  unbearable  for  the  subjects.  Such  a state 
will  fall  under  any  attack  and  such  people  will  perish  by 
famine.  And  all  this  is  due  to  the  absence  of  preparation. 
Moreover,  food  is  what  the  sages  treasured.  The  history 
of  Chou  says  ; Without  three  years’  food  (in  store)  a state 
cannot  be  a state  (as  it  is  in  danger  of  losing  its  sovereignty). 
A family  being  without  food  in  store  to  be  suiB&cient  for  three 
years  its  children  cannot  be  its  children  (who  are  in  danger 
of  being  abandoned  or  sold  to  others).”  Such,  then,  is  the 
preparation  of  a country. 


CHAPTEE  VI 
Indulgence  in  Excess 

Motse  said  ; Before  the  art  of  building  houses  and  palaces 
was  known  primitive  people  lingered  by  the  mounds  and 
lived  in  caves.  It  was  damp  and  injurious  to  health.  There- 
upon the  sage-kings  ^ built  houses  and  palaces.  The  guiding 
principles  for  these  buildings  were  these : The  house  shall 
be  built  high  enough  to  avoid  the  damp  and  moisture  ; the 
walls  thick  enough  to  keep  out  the  wind  and  cold  ; the  roof 
strong  enough  to  stand  snow,  frost,  rain,  and  dew  ; and  the 
walls  in  the  palace  high  enough  to  observe  the  propriety  of 
the  sexes.  These  are  suiSScient,  and  any  expenditure  of 
money  and  energy  that  does  not  bring  additional  utility  shall 
not  be  permitted.  When  the  city  walls  are  repaired  with 
regular  labour,  the  people  may  feel  tired  but  there  is  no 
exhaustion.  When  taxes  are  collected  according  to  custom, 
the  people  may  be  deprived  of  some  money  but  there  is  no 
bitterness.  The  real  woe  of  the  people  does  not  lie  here, 
it  lies  in  heavy  taxes. 

The  sage-kings  built  houses  and  palaces  in  order  to  better 
the  living  conditions  and  not  for  pleasures  of  sight.  They 
made  clothes  and  hats,  belts  and  shoes  in  order  to  protect 
the  body  and  not  for  novelty.  They  were  thrifty  themselves 
and  taught  the  people  to  be  the  same.  And,  so,  the  people 
in  the  whole  world  became  orderly  and  wealth  was  sufficient 

^ The  “ sage-kings  here  seem  to  refer  to  the  Nest  Builders.  They  have 
always  been  regarded  as  the  first;  teachers  of  the  art  of  house  building. 
They  lived  in  the  fourth  millennium  b.c.  Cf.  Motse,  ihe  Neglected  Rival  of 
Confucius,  chap.  i. 


INDULGENCE  IN  EXCESS 


23 


for  use.  When  tile  present  rulers'  build  tbeir  residences, 
tbey  are  quite''  different  : from  this.  They  would  heavily 
tax  the  people,  robbing  them’  of  their  means  of  livelihood, 
in  ordei'  to  have'  their  palaces  'covered  with  porches  and 
pavilions  in  vario'iis  designs,  and  adorned  with  paintings  and 
sculpture.  When  the  ruler  builds  his  palaces  in  this  fashion, 
his  assistants  , naturally  imitate  ■ him.  And,  so,  there  is 
not  sufficient  wealth  to  prepare  against  famine  and  dearth 
or  to  relieve  the  orphans  and  widows.  And  the  people 
become  more  unruly  as  the  state  becomes  poorer.  If  the 
rulers  sincerely  desire  to  have  the  empire  orderly  and  hate 
to  see  it  in  disorder,  they  must  not  indulge  in  building  houses 
and  palaces. 

Before  clothing  was  known  the  primitive  people  wore  coats 
of  furs  and  belts  of  straw.  They  were  neither  light  and  warm 
in  winter  nor  light  and  cool  in  summer.  The  sage-Mng^ 
thought  this  did  not  satisfy  the  needs  of  man.  So,  he  taught 
the  women  to  produce  silk  and  flax  and  to  weave  cloth  and 
linen,  therewith  to  make  clothing  for  the  people.  The 
guiding  principles  for  clothing  were  these : In  winter  the 
underwear  shall  be  made  of  spun-silk  so  as  to  be  light  and 
warm.  In  summer  it  shall  be  made  of  coarse  flax  so  as  to 
be  light  and  cool.  And  this  is  sufficient.  Therefore  the 
sages  made  their  clothes  just  to  fit  their  stature  and  size, 
and  not  for  the  purpose  of  pleasing  the  senses  or  to  dazzle 
the  common  people.  In  that  age,  durable  carts  and  gentle 
horses  were  not  valued,  neither  were  sculpture  and  adornments 
prized . What  is  the  reason  for  this  ?,  The  reason  lies  in 

1 This  seems  to  refer  to  Hua^ig  Ti,  2697-2597  B.c.,  whose  consort  first 
taught  the  women  the  art  of  raising  silk- worms.  Cf.  3Iot6e,  the  Neglected 
Rival  of  Conf'ucius,  chap,  i* 


24 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


the  kind  of  leadersidp.  Tie  people  kad  sufficient  means 
of  livelihood  in  their  home  to  meet  either  drought  or  floods 
dearth  or  famine.  Why  ■ Because  they  imderstood  the 
needs  of  self-support  and  paid  little  attention  to  external 
appearance.  So,  the  people  were  frugal  and  orderly  and  the 
ruler  was  thrifty  and  easily  supported.  The  store  house 
and  treasury  were  full,  prepared  against  misfortunes.  Armour 
and  weapons  were  not  left  in  disuse  and  the  soldiers  and  the 
people  were  not  tired,  ready  to  punish  the  unsubmissive. 
Thus  the  ruler  could  become  a tyrant  over  the  empire. 

The  present  rulers  are  quite  different  from  this  when 
they  make  their  clothes.  Having  what  is  warm  and  light  in 
winter  and  what  is  light  and  cool  in  summer,  they  would  yet 
heavily  tax  the  people,  robbing  them  of  their  means  of  liveli- 
hood, in  order  to  have  elaborately  embroidered  and  gorgeous 
garments.  Hooks  are  made  of  gold  and  ornaments  on  the 
girdle  consist  of  pearls  and  jades.  Women  are  employed 
to  make  the  embroidery  and  men  to  do  the  carving.  All 
these  are  for  the  adornment  of  the  body.  They  really  add 
little  to  its  warmth.  Wealth  is  squandered  and  energy 
wasted  all  for  naught.  So,  then,  when  clothing  is  made 
not  for  the  body  but  for  brilliant  appearance,  the  people 
will  be  wicked  and  unruly  and  the  ruler  extravagant  and 
deaf  to  good  counsel.  It  will  be  impossible  to  keep  the  country 
out  of  disorder.  If  the  rulers  sincerely  desire  the  empire 
to  have  order  and  hate  to  see  it  in  disorder,  they  must  not 
indulge  in  making  clothing  excessively. 

Before  the  art  of  cooking  was  known,  primitive  people  ate 
only  vegetables  and  lived  in  separation.  Thereupon  the  sage  ^ 

^ This  seems  to  refer  to  Shen  Nung,  twenty-eighth  century  b.c.,  the  father 
of  Chines©  agricnitTire  and  medicine.  Cf.  3Iotse,  the  Neglected  Rival  of 
Confucius,  chap.  i. 


INDULGENCE  IN  EXCESS 


25 


taught  the  men  to  attend  to  farming  and  to  plant 
trees  to  supply  the  people  with  food.  And  the  sole  purpose 
of  securing  food  is  to  increase  energy,  satisfy  hunger, 
strengthen  the  body  and  appease  the  stomach.  He  was 
frugal  in  spending  wealth  and  simple  in  habits  of  living,  and, 
so,  the  people  became  rich  and  the  country  orderly. 

With  the  present  rulers  all  is  different.  They  would 
heavily  tax  the  people  in  order  to  enjoy  elaborately  the 
different  meats  and  fish  and  turtle  cooked  in  various  ways, 
(The  lord  of)  a large  state  is  served  with  a hundred  courses 
and  (that  of)  a small  state,  with  tens  of  courses,  which  will 
cover  a table  space  of  ten  square  feet.  The  eyes  cannot 
see  all  the  dishes,  the  hands  cannot  handle  them  all,  and 
the  mouth  cannot  taste  them  all.  In  winter  they  will  freeze, 
and  in  summer  they  sour.  As  the  ruler  serves  himself  thus, 
naturally  his  assistants  imitate  him.  And  so  the  rich  and 
high  in  rank  are  wasteful  and  extravagant,  while  the  solitary 
and  miserable  are  hungry  and  cold.  It  is  impossible  to 
keep  such  a state  out  of  disorder.  If  the  rulers  sincerely 
desire  the  empire  to  have  order  and  hate  to  see  it  in  disorder, 
they  must  not  indulge  in  excessive  eating  and  drinking. 

Before  the  primitive  people  knew  how  to  make  boats  and 
carts  they  could  neither  carry  a heavy  load  nor  travel  a 
great  distance.  Thereupon  the  sage-king  ^ made  boats  and 
carts  to  facilitate  the  people.  The  boats  and  carts  were 
made  durable  and  convenient  so  that  they  would  carry  much 
and  travel  far.  Such  an  undertaking  takes  little  wealth 
but  produces  many  benefits.  Naturally  the  people  found 

^ This  seems  also  to  refer  to  Huang  Ti,  to  whom  the  invention  of  boat 
and  vehicle  is  traditionally  ascribed. 


26 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


it  agreeable  and  convenient.  The  people  were  not  tired 
out  and  yet  the  ruler’s  needs  were  all  supplied,  SOj  people 
were  attracted  to  him. 

When  the  present  rulers  make  boats  and  carts,  it  is  quite 
difierent.  Having  made  them  durable  and  convenient, 
they  would  yet  heavily  tax  the  people  to  decorate  them. 
The  carts  are  decorated  with  embroidery  and  boats  with 
carving.  Women  have  to  stop  weaving  to  do  the  embroidery 
so  the  people  are  left  cold.  While  men  have  to  abandon 
agriculture  to  do  the  carving  and  so  the  people  become  hungry. 
When  the  ruler  builds  such  boats  and  carts  for  himself, 
naturally  his  assistants  imitate  him.  Therefore  the  people 
become  victims  of  both  hunger  and  cold,  and  they  commit 
wickedness.  Much  wickedness  is  followed  by  heavy  punish- 
ment, and  heavy  punishment  places  the  country  in  disorder. 
If  the  rulers  sincerely  desire  the  empire  to  have  order  and 
hate  to  see  it  in  disorder,  they  must  not  indulge  themselves 
in  constructing  boats  and  carts  excessively. 

Every  creature  living  between  Heaven  and  earth  and  within 
the  four  seas  ^ partakes  of  the  nature  of  Heaven  and  earth 
and  the  harmony  of  the  Yin  and  the  Yang.^  Even  the 
greatest  sages  cannot  alter  this.  How  do  we  know  ? When 
they  taught  about  Heaven  and  earth,  they  dwelt  on  the  upper 
and  the  lower  spheres  and  the  four  seasons,  the  principles 
of  Yin  and  Yang  and  human  nature,  the  phenomena  of  men 

^ This  is  the  primitive  Chinese  conception  of  the  world.  It  has  been 
made  famous  by  the  often  quoted  Confucian  saying : “ Within  the  four 
seas  all  are  brothers.” 

2 This  harmony  is  one  of  two  principles  in  constant  strife  against  each 
other.  Compare  this  metaphysical  concept  of  reality  with  the  Pythagorean 
dpfiovC-r}  and  the  Herakleitean  “ opposite  tension”. 


27'... 


INDULGENCE  : IN  EXCESS 

and  women,  birds  and  animals,  and  that  of  the  sexes.  Even 
the  early  kings  could  not  escape  from  the  fundamentals  of 
nature.  Even  the  great  sages  of  ancient  times  must  keep 
a household.^  Only,  as  their  conduct  was  not  unfavourably 
affected,  there  was  no  dissatisfaction  among  the  people, 
and  as  women  were  not  kept  within  the  palace  (to  be  spinsters) 
there  were  few  bachelors  in  the  empire.  As  women  were 
not  kept  within  the  palace  and  as  there  were  few  bachelors 
abroad,  the  population  in  the  empire  was  large. 

The  present  rulers  of  large  states  retain  as  many  women 
as  a thousand  in  their  household  and  those  of  small  states 
as  many  as  a hundred.  Therefore  men  in  the  empire  axe 
mostly  without  wife  and  women  without  husband.  The 
functions  of  men  and  women  are  prevented  and  the  population 
becomes  small.  If  the  rulers  sincerely  desire  the  population 
to  be  large  and  hate  to  see  it  small,  they  must  not  indulge 
in  retaining  too  many  women. 

Now,  in  these  five  things  ^ the  sages  are  temperate  and 
economical  while  the  wicked  men  are  indulgent  and  excessive. 
Temperance  and  economy  bring  prosperity  while  indulgence 
and  excess  lead  to  destruction.  One  must  not  indulge  in 
excess  in  these  five  things.  When  husband  and  wife  do  not 
indulge  in  excess,  Heaven  and  earth  will  be  harmonious ; 
when  wind  and  rain  are  not  in  excess,  the  five  grains  will 
ripen ; and  when  excessive  clothing  is  not  indulged  in,  the 
body  will  be  comfortable. 

^ The  old  Chinese  household  is  a large  one.  Not  counting  the  relatives 
and  dependents,  the  household  proper  consists  of  the  master,  the  mistress, 
and  a group  of  concubines  and  maids  whose  number  increases  with  the  rank 
and  means  of  the  lord. 

2 Namely,  in  the  provision  of  (1)  shelter,  (2)  clothing,  (3)  food,  (4)  boats 
and  vehicles,  and  (5)  in  sexual  relations. 


CHAPTER  VII 

Threefold  Argument  ^ 

Ch’eng  Fan  ^ asked  Motse : “ Sir,  you  say  the  sage-kings 
did  not  have  music.  But,  anciently,  when  the  feudal  lords 
were  tired  of  attending  to  government,  they  found  recreation 
in  music  of  bells  and  drums.  When  the  ministers  and  gentle- 
men were  tired  of  attending  to  office  they  found  recreation 
in  music  of  yti  ^ and  she.^  And  the  farmers  ploughed  the 
fields  in  spring,  weeded  them  in  summer,  reaped  the  harvest 
in  autumn,  and  stored  the  grains  in  winter.  Then  they 
would  enjoy  music  of  jars  and  vases.^  Sir,  you  say  the  sage- 
kings  did  not  have  music.  This  would  be  comparing  them  to 
the  horse  placed  under  yoke  and  never  released,  and  the 
bow  drawn  and  never  unstrung.  Is  this  not  impossible 
for  the  ordinary  human  being  ? 

Motse  replied ; In  ancient  times,  Yao  and  Shun  lived  in 
huts  and  yet  they  made  codes  of  propriety  and  composed 
music.®  T’ang  sent  Chieh  to  exile  on  the  ocean  and  installed 
himself  ruler  of  the  empire.  Having  achieved  success  and 
without  cause  for  anxiety,  he  added  to  the  music  of  the  former 

^ This  chapter  merely  answers  an  objection  to  Motse’s  **  Condemkatiox 
OF  Music  chaps,  xxxii-iv.  It  is  hardly  an  appendix.  It,  if  Motse  was 
its  author,  reminds  one  of  Descartes'  publication  of  the  objections  to  his 
doctrine  and  his  answers  with  his  main  treatise  of  the  Meditations, 

® Ch'eng  Fan  is  a scholar  of  both  Confucianism  and  Moism. 

3 Yu  ^ is  a Chinese  hand  organ  of  thirty-six  reed  pipes. 

* SbS  ^ is  a Chinese  horizontal  psalteiy  of  twenty-five  strings. 

® These  earthenware  were  a regular  department  of  ancient  Chinese 
musical  instruments. 

® This  does  not  mean  that  they  did  this  themselves.  It  only  says  that 
it  is  done  under  their  auspices. 


THREEFOLD  ARGUMENT 


29 


IdBgs  that  of  his  own  composition,  called  The  Salvation  ' V 
and;  also  institn^^^  the  “ Chin  Chao^’’.  King  Wn  conquered 
the  Yin  dynasty  and  executed  Chow  and  installed  himself 
ruler  of  the  empire.  Having  achieved  success  and  having 
no  cause  of  anxiety,  he  added  to  the  music  of  the  former  kings 
that  of  Ms  own  composition,  called  “ Hsiang  King  Ch’eng 
of  Chou  again  added  to  the  music  of  the  former  kings  that  of 
his  own  compostion,  named  “ Tsou  Yii  The  reign  of  King 
Ch’eng  was  not  so  good  as  that  of  Bang  Wu,  that  of  King  Wu 
was  not  so  good  as  that  of  T’ang  the  Successful,  and  that 
of  T^ang  the  Successful  was  not  so  good  as  that  of  Yao  and 
Shun,  So,  then,  he  who  has  the  more  elaborate  music  has 
the  less  efficient  government.  Judging  from  this,  music 
is  not  anything  to  govern  the  empire  with. 

Ch’eng  Fan  objected : Sir,  you  have  said  the  sage- 
kings  did  not  have  music.  This  shows  they  did.  How  then 
can  you  say  the  sage-kings  did  not  have  music  ? ’’ 

Motse  said  ; The  desire  of  the  sage-Mngs  ^ was  to  cut  down 
excesses.  Eating  is  of  course  profitable,  but  it  takes  so  little 
intelligence  to  eat  when  one  is  hungry  that  it  may  be  said 
to  be  nil.  Now  the  sage-kings  had  music,  but  it  was  so  little 
that  it  may  also  be  said  to  be  nil. 

1 This  name  was  given  to  the  composition  to  commemorate  his  enterprise 
against  Chieh  the  wicked  king,  the  success  of  which  freed  the  people  from 
tyranny. 

® Certain  phrases,  clauses,  or  even  passages  seem  to  be  missing  here. 


BOOK  II 


CHAPTER  VIII 

Exaltation  of  the  Virtuous  ^ (I) 

Motse  said : Now,  all  tie  rulers  desire  tieir  provinces  to 
be  wealthy,  their  people  to  be  numerous,  and  their  juris- 
diction to  secure  order.  But  what  they  obtain  is  not  wealth 
but  poverty,  not  multitude  but  scarcity,  not  order  but 
chaos — this  is  to  lose  what  they  desire  and  obtain  what  they 
avert.  Why  is  this  ? ^ 

Motse  said  : This  is  because  the  rulers  have  failed  to  exalt 
the  virtuous  and  to  employ  the  capable  in  their  government. 
When  the  virtuous  are  numerous  in  the  state,  order  will  be 
stable  ; when  the  virtuous  are  scarce,  order  will  be  unstable. 
Therefore  the  task  of  the  lords  lies  nowhere  but  in  multiplying 
the  virtuous. 

But  what  is  the  way  to  multiply  the  virtuous  ? 

Motse  said : Supposing  it  is  desired  to  multiply  good 
archers  and  good  drivers^  in  the  country,  it  will  be  only 

^ The  Chinese  word  hsien  ^ includes  more  than  virtue  in  its  meaning. 
Wisdom  and  talent  are  also  implied.  It  is  hard  to  find  an  English  word 
for  this  combination.  It  is  interesting  to  recall  in  this  connexion  the 
Sooratio  formula : knowledge  is  virtue. 

® In  the  Motse  text  an  interrogation  is  often  used  to  form  the  tran- 
sition between  two  thoughts,  or  the  main  thought  and  its  explanation. 
It  reminds  one  of  the  more  artistically  interpolated  remarks  by  the  listeners 
in  Plato's  Dialogues. 

® The  ancient  Chinese  education  consists  of  six  arts,  namely,  (1)  Pro- 
priety, (2)  Music,  (3)  Archery,  (4)  Driving  (a  chariot),  (5)  Composition, 
and  (6)  Mathematics.  Confucius  was  himself  an  able  advocate  of  this 
curriculum.  Compare  with  Plato's  educational  programme  in  his  Republic. 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (I)  31 


natural  to  enrich  them,  honotir  them,  respect  them,  and 
commend  them ; then  good  archers  and  good  drivers  can  be 
expected  to  abound  in  the  country.  How  much  more  should 
this  be  done  in  the  case  of  the  virtuous  and  the  excellent  who 
are  firm  in  morality,  versed  in  rhetoric,  and  experienced  in 
statecraft — since  these  are  the  treasures  of  the  nation  and 
props  of  the  state  ? They  should  also  be  enriched,  honoured, 
respected,  and  commended  in  order  that  they  may  abound. 

When  the  ancient  sage-kings^  administered  the  govern- 
ment they  declared  : “ The  unrighteous  will  not  be  enriched, 
the  unrighteous  will  not  be  honoured,  the  unrighteous  will 
not  be  favoured,^  the  unrighteous  will  not  be  placed  near."" 
Upon  hearing  this,  the  rich  and  honoured  of  the  country  all 
began  to  deliberate,  saying  : “ What  I have  been  depending 
on  was  wealth  and  honour.  Now  the  Lord  promotes  the 
righteous  without  discrimination  against  the  poor  and 
humble.  Hence  I may  not  do  unrighteousness.""  Upon  hearing 
this,  the  favoured  also  began  to  deliberate,  sa3drLg  : “ What 
I have  been  depending  on  was  favour.  Now  the  Lord  promotes 
the  righteous  without  discrimination  against  those  thus  far 

^ Subsequent  text  shows  Motse  here  had  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen, 
and  Wu  in  mind.  Infra,  p.  38,  note  1. 

2 The  Chinese  word  here  is  Ch 'in  An  ordinary  meaning  of  it  is 
relation,  relatives,  or  to  be  related.  According  to  this  meaning  the  clause 
will  have  to  read  “ relatives  if  unrighteous  will  not  be  recognized  as  such 
And  similarly  the  sentence  after  next  will  have  to  be  rendered  “ Upon 
hearing  this,  the  relatives  also  began  to  deliberate,  saying,  ‘ What  I have 
been  depending  on  was  relationship.  Now  the  Lord  promotes  the  righteous 
without  discrimination  against  those  who  are  unrelated.  Hence  I may  not 
do  unrighteousness.*  " But  this  is  clumsy  expression  in  itself  and  destroys 
the  parallelism  of  clauses  that  is  a feature  of  the  ethical  books  in  Motse, 
At  any  rate,  the  version  as  given  here  in  the  translation  seems  to  include 


32 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


neglected.  Hence  I may  not  do  unxighteousness/’  Upon 
tearing  ttis,  those  placed  near  began  to  deliberate,  saying : 

What  I have  been  depending  on  was  intimacy.  Now  tbe 
Lord  promotes  the  righteous  without  discrimination  against 
the  distant.  Hence  I may  not  do  unrighteousness.’'  Upon 
hearing  this,  the  distant  also  began  to  deliberate,  saying  : 

I used  to  think,  being  distant  I had  nothing  to  depend  on. 
Now  the  Lord  promotes  the  righteous  without  discrimina- 
tion against  the  distant.  Hence  I may  not  do  unrighteousness. ' ’ 
Vassals  of  distant  districts  as  well  as  youths  in  the  palace, 
and  multitudes  within  the  state  boundaries  as  well  as  the 
rustics  living  on  the  four  borders,  upon  hearing  this,  all 
competed  in  doing  righteousness. 

Now  what  is  the  reason  for  all  this  ? 

It  is  only  with  material  goods  that  the  superior  can  employ 
his  subordinates,  and  it  is  only  with  statecraft  that  the  sub- 
ordinates can  serve  their  lord.  Take,  for  example,  the  rich 
man  who  built  his  walls  high  and  left  only  one  gate.  When 
the  burglar  had  entered,  the  man  closed  the  gate  and  searched 
for  him,  and  the  burglar  had  no  more  exit.  Why  ? Because 
the  man  had  the  vantage-point.^ 

Therefore  in  administering  the  government,  the  ancient 
sage-kings  ranked  the  morally  excellent  high  and  exalted  the 
virtuous.  If  capable,  even  a farmer  or  an  artisan  would  be 
employed-commissioned  with  high  rank,  remunerated  with 
liberal  emoluments,  trusted  with  important  charges,  and 
empowered  to  issue  final  orders.  For,  if  his  rank  were  not 

^ The  point  of  this  illustration  seems  to  be  that  if  the  ruler  made  righteous- 
ness the  only  criterion  for  his  favours,  he  will  be  sure  to  secure  righteous 
people. 


EXALTATION  OE  THE  VIRTUOUS  (I)  33 

liigL,  people  would  not  respect  him ; if  Ms  emoluments  were 
not  liberal,  people  would  not  have  confidence  in  Mm  ; if  Ms 
orders  were  not  final,  people  would  not  stand  in  awe  before 
Mm.  To  place  these  three  (honours)  upon  the  virtuous  is 
not  so  much  to  reward  virtue,  as  to  bring  about  the  success 
of  the  enterprise  (of  government).^  Therefore  ranks  should 
be  standardized  according  to  virtue,  tasks  assigned  according 
to  office,  and  rewards  given  according  to  labour  spent.  ’When 
emoluments  are  distributed  in  proportion  to  achievements, 
officials  cannot  be  in  constant  honour,  and  people  in  eternal 
humility.  If  a person  is  capable  promote  Mm,  if  incapable, 
lower  his  rank.  Give  prominence  to  public  approval  and  keep 
back  private  grudges  (in  the  matter  of  selecting  men).  Here, 
then,  is  the  principle. 

So,  in  days  of  old,  Yao^  brought  forward  Shun^  from 
Fu  Tse  ® and  entrusted  him  with  the  government,  and  the 
world  had  peace.  Yii  ^ brought  forward  Yi  ^ from  Yin  Fang  ^ 
and  entrusted  him  with  the  government,  and  the  nine  districts 
became  organized.  T’ang  ^ brought  forward  Yi  Yin  ^ from  the 
kitchen^  and  entrusted  him  with  the  government  and  Ms 

^ According  to  Chinese  political  ideals,  the  government  is  looked  nppia 
as  a mission  and  trust  from  Heaven.  Its  well-being  is  the  highest  end 
of  the  ruler's  conduct  which  is  at  once  political  and  ethical. 

2 Names  of  prominent  political  and  ethical  figures  in  ancient  Chinese 
history. 

® Names  of  places  the  locations  of  which  are  now  either  entirely  unknown 
or  subjects  of  controversy  among  scholars. 

^ The  story  is  about  the  very  virtuous  man  whose  family  name  is  ¥1 
and  whose  name  is  Chih.  Yin  is  the  title  of  the  high  office  that  he  held 
under  T'ang.  And  he  is  popularly  known  as  Yi  Yin.  According  to  Lu  Pu-Wei, 
Oh^un  Oh'm  Pen  Wei  L%,  ^ ^ ^ or  Lu  Shik  Gh*un 

woman  of  the  tribe  of  Hsin,  found  a baby  among  the  mulberry  trees  while 
she  was  gathering  the  leaves.  She  offered  it  to  the  Prince  of  the  tribe  and  he 


34 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


plans  were  successful.  King  Wen  ^ brought  forward  Hung 
Yao  ^ and  T’ai  Tien  ^ from  their  rabbit  nets  ^ and  entrusted 
them  with  the  government  and  the  Western  land  » showed 
respect.  Therefore,  during  those  days  the  officials  of  high 
rank  and  liberal  emoluments  all  carefully  and  anxiously 
executed  their  duties ; and  the  farmers  and  artisans  all 

reared  him.  When  the  baby  grew  up  he  was  virtnoiis  and  this  was  Yt  Yin 
T’ang  had  heard  of  this  virtuous  man  in  the  tribe  of  Hsin  and  asked  to  hare 
him  but  W'as  refused.  Later  T’ang  .arranged  to  marry  the  dair-hter  of 
the  Prince  of  Hsin.  Yi  Yin  was  sent  in  the  brid.al  party.  Lii’s  account 
ends  here.  But  it  seems  that  Yi  Yin  did  not  get  any  immediate  notice  from 
T ang  upon  arriving  at  the  latter's  Court.  So  he  served  T’ang  in  his  kitchen 
and  later  was  discovered  by  T^ang  there. 

^ 1 Names  of  prominent  political  and  ethical  figures  in  ancient  Chine<:e 
history. 

» The  seventh  ode  mSUh  OUng  ||  g has  for  its  title  “ Rabbit  Kets  ”. 

I consists  of  three  stanzas.  According  to  the  translation  of  James  Le<rve' 
The  Chinese  Classics  (there  will  be  frequent  occasions  in  the  foUowhiff 
pages  to  refer  to  this  work.  We  shall  henceforth  let  “ Lc^ge  ” stand  for  the 
complete  Mo.  The  edition  used  is  that  of  Hongkong.  1861-5),  vol.  iv 
parti,  pp.  13-14,  it  reads:  Ain, 

“ Carefully  adjusted  are  the  rabbit  nets, 

Clang,  clang  go  the  blows  on  the  pegs. 

That  stalwart,  martial  man 
Might  be  shield  and  wall  to  his  prince. 

Carefully  adjusted  are  the  rabbit  nets. 

And  placed  where  many  ways  meet. 

That  stalwart,  martial  man 

Would  be  good  companion  for  his  prince. 

Carefully  adjusted  are  the  rabbit  nets, 

And  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  forest. 

That  stalwart,  martial  man 

Might  he  head  and  heart  to  his  prince.*^ 

It  is  an  exaltation  of  the  justice  of  King  Wen  who  would  exalt  persona 

catchers  if  they  are  vktuous  . 

Earl  ^anl  - 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIKTUOUS  (I)  S5 


eaoonraged ' one  anotiier  in  exalting  ratne.  Therefore,'  the: 
scholars  are  really  to  be  officials  and  governors.  As  long  as 
there  were  scholars  (in  government),  the  plans  (of  the  rtder) 
were  not  defeated  and  he  had  no  hardships  to  endure ; his 
name  was  established  and  success  achieved ; his  excellence 
became  known  and  yet  evils  were  not  spread.  This  is  all  due 
to  the  employment  of  the  scholars. 

Therefore  Motse  said:  The  virtuous  who  are  prosperous 
must  be  exalted,  and  the  virtuous  who  are  not  prosperous 
must  be  exalted  too.  If  it  is  desired  to  continue  the  ways 
of  Yao  and  Shun,  to  exalt  the  virtuous  is  indispensable. 
Now,  exaltation  of  the  virtuous  is  the  root  of  government. 

1 

li'f 


’ ■ 

; • { , 


rr?<;V':, 
’ ’ , ■'■' 


CHAPTER  IX 

Exaltation  of  the  Virtuous  (II) 

Motse  said:  Now,  in  caring  for  the  people,  ruling  the 
state,  and  governing  the  country,  the  rulers  desire  per- 
i^nenoy  and  stabilily.  But  why  do  they  not  learn  that  exalta- 
tion of  the  virtuous  is  the  foundation  of  government  ? 

How  do  we  know  exaltation  of  the  virtuous  is  the  founda- 
tion of  government  ? 

When  the  honourable  and  wise  run  the  government,  the 
Ignorant  and  humble  remain  orderly ; but  when  the  ignorant 
and  humble  run  the  government,  the  honourable  and  wise 
become  rebeUious.  Therefore  we  know  exaltation  of  the 
virtuous  is  the  foundation  of  government. 

The  ancient  sage-kings  greatly  emphasized  the  exaltation 
of  the  vntuous  and  the  employment  of  the  capable.  Without 
special  consideration  for  relatives,  for  the  rich  and  honoured 
or  for  the  good-looking,  they  exalted  and  promoted  the 
virtuous,  enriched  and  honoured  them,  and  made  them 
pvernors  and  leaders.  The  vicious  they  kept  back  and 
amshed,  depossessed  and  degraded,  and  made  labourers 
and  servants.  Thereupon  people  were  all  encouraged  by 
rewards  and  threatened  by  punishments  and  strove  with  each 
0 her  after  vutue.  Thus  the  virtuous  multiplied  and  the 
vicious  diminished  in  number.  Such  is  exaltation  of  the 
v^uous  Then  the  sage-kings  watched  their  words  and 
observed  their  conduct,  found  out  their  capabilities  and 
carefuUy  aligned  them  their  offices.  Such  is  employment 
of  the  capable.  Accordingly  those  who  were  capable  to  govern 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIETUOUS  (II)  37 


tlie  cdmtry^  w govern  the  country,  those  who 

were  capable  to  administer  the  court  were  made  to  administer 
the  court,  and  those  who  were  capable  in  managing  the 
districts  were  made  to  manage  the  districts.  All  those  who  had 
charge  of  the  country,  the  court,  and  the  districts  were  then 
the  virtuous  of  the  land. 

When  the  virtuous  rules  the  country,  he  starts  the  day 
early  and  retires  late,  hearing  lawsuits  and  attending  to 
the  government.  As  a result,  the  country  is  well  governed 
and  laws  are  justly  administered.  When  the  virtuous 
administers  the  court  he  retires  late  and  wakes  up  early, 
collecting  taxes  from  passes,  markets,  and  on  products  from 
mountains,  woods,  waters,  and  land  to  fill  the  court.  As  a 
result,  the  court  is  filled  and  wealth  is  not  wasted.  When  the 
virtuous  manages  the  districts,  he  goes  out  before  sunrise 
and  comes  back  after  sunset,  plowing  and  sowing,  planting 
and  cultivating,  and  gathering  harvests  of  grains.  As  a 
result,  grains  are  in  plenty  and  people  are  sufficiently  supplied 
with  food.  Therefore  when  the  country  is  well  governed  the 
laws  are  well  administered,  and  when  the  court  is  filled  the 
people  are  wealthy.  For  the  higher  sphere,  the  rulers  had 
wherewith  to  make  wine  and  cakes  to  do  sacrifice  and  libation 
to  Heaven  and  the  spirits.  For  the  countries  outside,  they 
had  wherewith  to  provide  the  furs  and  money  to  befriend 
neighbouring  feudal  lords.  For  the  people  within,  they  had 
wherewith  to  feed  the  hungry  and  give  rest  to  the  tired. 
Above  all  these,  they  had  means  to  cherish  the  virtuous. 
Therefore  from  above,  Heaven  and  the  spirits  enrich  them ; 
from  without,  the  feudal  lords  submit  themselves  to  them ; 
from  within,  the  people  show  them  affection,  and  the  virtuous 


become  loyal  to  them.  Hence  they  could  have  satisfaction 
in  planning  and  success  in  execution.  In  defence  they  are 
strong  and  in  attack  victorious.  How  the  way  that  enabled 
the  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  namely  Yao,  Shun 
Yii,  T ang,  Wen  and  Wu,^  to  rule  the  empire  and  head  the 
feudal  lords  was  no  other  than  this  (principle  of  exaltation 
of  the  virtuous). 

However,  if  there  is  only  the  principle  while  the  technique 
of  its  application  is  not  known,  then  it  would  seem  to  be  still 
incomplete.  Therefore  there  should  be  laid  down  three  rules. 
What  are  the  three  rules  ? They  are  : (I)  when  their  rank 
(that  of  the  virtuous)  is  not  high,  people  would  not  show 
them  respect ; (2)  when  their  emoluments  are  not  liberal 
people  would  not  place  confidence  in  them ; (3)  when  their 
orders  are  not  final,  people  would  not  stand  in  awe  before 
them.  So  the  ancient  sage-kings  placed  them  high  in  rank, 
gave  them  liberal  emoluments,  trusted  them  with  important 
charges,  and  decreed  their  orders  to  be  final.  And  all  this 
was  done  not  merely  to  reward  their  subordinates  : it  was  to 
fulfil  their  trust.^ 

Thus  runs  an  Ode : “ I am  instructing  you  to  take  worries 
and  cares  of  the  world  as  your  own ; I am  teaching  the  order 
of  ranks  for  the  virtuous  and  talented.  Who  can  handle 


1 “ The  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties  " had  become  a ^ 

virtue  even  at  such  an  early  time  as  that  of  Confucius  The 

® Supra,  p.  33,  note  1, 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (II)  39 


Feat  witFoiit  rinsing;  Fis'  Fands  (in  cold  water)  TFis  is 
to  sFow  Fow  in  tFo:  past  tFe  rulers  could  not  do  witFout 
befriending  subordinates  and  helpers.  It  was  like  the  necessity 
of  rinsing  in  handling  hot  objects  to  relieve  the  hands. 

The  ancient  sage-kings  concentrated  on  acquiring  and 
employing  the  virtuous— honouring  them  with  high  ranks, 
and  assigning  land  to  them — unwearied  to  the  end  of  their 
lives.  The  virtuous  men  on  the  other  hand  only  hoped  to  find 
an  enlightened  ruler  to  serve— exhausting  all  the  powers  of 
the  four  limbs  to  attend  to  the  king's  business— untired  to 
the  end  of  their  lives.  When  there  were  any  excellences  and 
virtues  they  were  attributed  to  the  emperor.  Thus  excellences 
and  virtues  belonged  to  the  emperor  while  complaints  and 
slanders  were  directed  against  the  subordinates.  Peace  and 
joy  abode  with  the  king  while  worries  and  sorrows  were 
lodged  with  the  officials.  This  was  how  the  ancient  sage- 
kings  administered  the  government.  The  present  rulers, 
imitating  the  ancients,  also  want  to  employ  the  virtuous  in 
government  by  exalting  them.  Ranks  given  them  are  very 
high,  but  the  emoluments  do  not  follow  proportionally.  Now, 

^ This  quotation  is  evidently  from  the  Ode  **  Sang  Jou  in  JShih  Ching, 
though  the  text  in  SMh  Ohing  shows  some  modification.  According 
to  Legge,  whose  translation  here  does  not  seem  to  be  quite  adequate,  the 
fi.fth  stanza  of  “ Sang  Yew  (vol.  iv,  part  iii,  Book  hi,  ode  hi,  p.  622) 
reads : 

“Yon  have  your  counsels;  you  employ  caution; 

But  the  disorder  grows  and  dismemberments  ensue. 

I tell  you  the  subjects  of  anxiety; 

I instruct  you  how  to  distinguish  the  orders  of  men. 

Who  can  hold  anything  hot  ? 

Must  he  not  dip  it  (first)  in  water  ? 

^ How  can  you  (by  your  method)  bring  a good  state  of  things  about  ? 

You  (and  your  advisers)  will  sink  together  in  ruin.'" 


40 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE;  ; , 

to  be  bigb  in  rank  but  receive  small  emoluments  will  not 
inspire  people’s  confidence.  Tbe  virtuous  would  say*  to  tlieni- 
selves  : This  is  not  real  love  for  me,  but  only  to  make  use 
of  me  as  a means.”  ISrow,  bow  can  people  be  afectionate  to 
tbeir  superiors  when  they  are  only  (treated  as)  means  ? 
Therefore  an  ancient  king  said  ; He  who  is  too  ambitious 
in  government  will  not  share  his  tasks  with  others.  He  who 
over-treasures  wealth  will  not  ofier  big  emoluments  to 
others.”  When  tasks  are  not  assigned  and  emoluments  are 
not  given,  it  may  be  asked  wherefrom  would  the  virtuous 
come  to  the  side  of  the  rulers  ? 

And  when  the  virtuous  are  not  at  the  side  of  the  rulers, 
the  vicious  will  be  on  their  right  and  left.  When  the  vicious 
are  on  the  right  and  left,  then  commendations  will  not  fall 
on  the  virtuous  and  punishments  will  not  be  upon  the  wicked. 
If  the  rulers  follow  these  in  governing  the  states,  in  the 
same  way  rewards  will  not  go  to  the  virtuous  and  punish- 
ment not  to  the  wicked.  When  rewards  really  do  not  go  to 
the  virtuous  and  punishment  not  to  the  wicked,  then  the 
virtuous  will  find  no  encouragement,  neither  the  wicked  any 
obstruction.  At  home  the  vicious  are  not  filial  to  their  parents, 
and,  having  left  their  home  town,  they  would  not  recognize 
their  elders.  They  move  about  without  restraint  and  disregard 
the  rules  of  propriety  about  sexes.  When  trusted  with  the 
administration  of  the  court,  they  would  steal ; when  trusted 
to  defend  a city,  they  would  raise  an  insurrection.  the 

lord  meets  with  death,  they  would  not  follow  him  and 
commit  suicide ; when  the  lord  has  to  flee  the  country, 
they  would  not  accompany  him  in  banishment.^  In  judging 

^ These  are  the  common  law  requirements  of  the  Chinese  code  of  loyalty. 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (II)  41 


lawsuits  they  are  not  just,  and  in  dividing  property 
they  are  partial.  In  planning  they  are  not  helpful,  in  execu- 
tion they  are  inefficient.  Neither  in  defence  are  they  strong, 
nor  in  attack  are  they  victorious.  Now,  the  reason  that  the 
wicked  kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  namely,  Chieh,  Chow, 
Yu,  and  Li,^  misruled  the  country  and  upset  their  states 
was  no  other  than  this  (employment  of  the  vicious). 

Why  is  this  so  ? Because  they  understood  petty 
but  were  ignorant  about  things  of  importance.  When  the 
rulers  cannot  get  a coat  mad©  they  will  employ  able 
tailors.  When  they  cannot  have  an  ox  or  a sheep  killed 
will  employ  able  butchers.  In  these  two  instances  they  do 
know  they  should  exalt  the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capa 
for  business.  But  when  it  comes  to  the  disorder  of  the  country 
and  danger  of  the  state,  they  do  not  know  they  should  exalt 
the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capable  for  government.  Rather, 
they  would  employ  their  relatives,  they  would  employ 
rich  without  merit,  and  the  good-looking.  But  as  to  the 
employment  of  the  rich  without  merit  and  the  good-looking — 
will  these  necessarily  prove  themselves  wise  and  intelligent  ? 
To  let  these  rule  the  country  is  to  let  the  unwise  and  unin- 
telligent rule  the  country.  And  disorder  can  then  be  pre- 
dicted. Moreover,  the  rulers  employ  their  minds  by  the 
attractiveness  of  their  appearance,  and  show  them  favour 
without  finding  out  their  knowledge.  As  a result, 
are  not  capable  to  rule  a hundred  men  are  assigned  to 
over  a thousand,  and  those  who  are  not  capable  to 
thousand  are  assigned  to  posts  over  ten  thousand.  What  is 


Ciiieli  is  of  Hsia,  Chow  of  Shaixg,  Yu  and  Li  of  Chou. 


42 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


tlie  reason  for  this  ? Why,  such  positions  are  high  in  rardc 
and  rich  in  emoluments.  Therefore  the  specially  favoured 
are  picked  for  them.  But  to  make  those  incapable  of  ruling 
a thousand  men  rule  ten  thousand  is  to  increase  their  duty 
tenfold.  The  business  of  the  government  comes  daily.  It  is 
to  be  attended  to  every  day,  yet  the  day  cannot  be  lengthened 
by  tenfold.  To  govern,  again,  requires  knowledge.  When 
knowledge  is  not  increased  by  ten  times,  while  a tenfold  task 
is  assigned,  it  will  evidently  result  in  attending  to  one  and 
neglecting  nine.  Though  the  task  be  attended  to  day  and 
night,  still  it  cannot  be  well  executed.  And  the  reason  for 
this  is  because  the  rulers  do  not  understand  that  they  should 
exalt  the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capable  in  government. 

Thus  exaltation  of  the  virtuous  and  employment  of  the 
capable  with  the  consequent  success  in  government  is  pre- 
sented above  in  the  earlier  paragraphs.  And  the  deprecia- 
tion of  the  virtuous  with  the  resulting  confusion  in  government 
is  presented  here  in  these  paragraphs.  If  the  rulers  now  want 
to  govern  their  states  so  that  they  will  be  permanent  and 
unshakeable,  why  do  they  not  learn  that  exaltation  of  the 
virtuous  is  the  foundation  of  government  ? 

Besides,  is  this  principle  merely  a conception  of  Motse  ? 
It  is  the  way  of  the  sage-kings  and  the  tenet  of  Chli  Men 
a book  of  an  ancient  king.  And,  thus  it  is  recorded  : (He) 
sought  out  the  wise  men  to  protect  and  aid  you/’  ^ And  thus 

^ Further,  on  p.  52  “ Shu  Nien  **  and  p,  65  “ Hsiang  Hien  are  also 
mentioned.  They  ail  seem  to  refer  to  an  Essay  in  Shu  Ohing  :g: 

But  the  Essay  is  not  found  in  the  present  text  of  Shu  Ohing, 

2 This  quotation  is  from  “ The  Instructions  of  Yi  in  Shu  Ohing,  For 
the  full  context  see  Legge,  vol.  iii,  part  i,  p.  196. 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (II)  43 

states  the  ''  Oath  of  T’ang  ’’ : "M  then  sought  for  the  Great 
Sage,  with  whom  I might  unite  my  strength  and  mind  to 
govern  the  empire.’’^  All  these  show  how  the  sage-kings 
never  failed  to  exalt  the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capable 
in  government.  The  sage-kings  of  old  comprehended  only 
this — to  exalt  the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capable  in  govern- 
ment and  nobody  else  ; so  the  whole  world  was  benefited. 

In  times  of  old,  Shun  cultivated  land  at  Mt.  Li,^  made 
pottery  by  the  River,  ^ and  was  engaged  in  fishing  in  Lake 
Lei.^  Yao  discovered  him  at  FuTse.^  Exalting  him,  Yao  made 
him  Emperor  and  handed  to  him  the  government  of  the 
empire  and  the  rule  over  the  people.  Yi  CMh  once  served  in 
the  bridal  party  of  the  daughter  of  the  Prince  of  Hsin,^  and  later 
voluntarily  served  T’ang  as  his  cook.  T^ang  discovered  him. 
Exalting  him,  T’ang  made  him  his  Prime  Minister  and  handed 
to  him  the  government  of  the  empire  and  the  rule  over  the 
people.  Fu  Yiieh  once  wore  garments  of  coarse  cloth  tied 
with  ropes,  working  as  an  artisan  at  Fu  Yen.^  Wu  Ting  dis- 
covered him.^  Exalting  him,  Wu  Ting  made  him  High  Duke 

^ This  quotation  is  not  found  in  the  “ Oath  of  T’ang but  with  some 
modifications  in  the  “ Proclamation  of  T'ang**  in  the  present  text  of  Shu 
Ching.  See  Legge,  vol.  iii,  part  i,  p.  187. 

^ Names  of  places  the  location  of  which  are  now  either  entirely  unknown 
or  subject  to  controversy  among  scholars.  Supra,  p.  33,  note  3. 

® Supra,  p.  33,  note  4, 

* This  story  is  about  the  virtuous  man,  Pu  Yueh.  Yiieh  is  the  name  of 
the  man  and  Fu  is  the  surname  given  him  by  Emperor  Wu  Ting  because 
he  was  discovered  at  Fu  Yen— a common  practice  in  those  ancient  days. 
According  to  Huang  Fu  Mi,  the  Emperor  had  a dream  of  a virtuous  man 
sent  to  him  by  Heaven  in  a prisoner’s  apparel.  And  the  man  told  him, 
‘‘  I am  a prisoner  by  the  name  of  Fu  Yiieh  When  the  dream  was  told 
to  the  ministers,  none  thought  it  could  be  real.  But  the  Emperor  ordered 
to  have  the  man’s  likeness  painted  to  search  for  him  all  over  the  empire. 
Finally  a prisoner-labourer  was  found  at  Fu  Yen  by  the  name  of  Yiieh. 


u 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE  ; - 

and  handed  to  him ' the  goyernment  of  the  empire  and  the 
rule  over  the  people. 

Why  is  it  that  these  people  starting  in  humility  arrived  at 
honour,  starting  in  poverty  arrived  at  wealth  ? It  is  because 
these  rulers  understood  the  importance  of  exalting  the 
virtuous  and  emplo3dng  the  capable  in  governinent.  Therefore, 
none  of  the  people  were  hungry  yet  without  food,  cold  yet 
without  clothing,  tired  yet  without  rest,  disturbed  yet  without 
peace.  And,  the  ancient  sage-kings  in  exalting  the  virtuous 
and  employing  the  capable  in  government  were  following 
the  ways  of  Heaven.  Even  Heaven  does  not  discriminate 
among  the  poor  and  the  rich,  the  honourable  and 
the  humble,  the  distant  and  the  near,  and  the  related 
and  the  unrelated  (to  those  in  power).  The  virtuous 
were  promoted  and  exalted;  the  vicious  were  kept  back 
and  banished. 

Now,  who  were  those  that,  possessing  wealth  and  position, 
still  strove  after  virtues  and  were  rewarded  ? They  were  the 
sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  namely,  Yao,  Shun,  Yii, 
T’ang,  Wen  and  Wu.^  How  were  they  rewarded  ? When 
they  governed  the  empire,  they  loved  all  the  people  universally 
and  benefited  them,  and  led  them  in  doing  honour  to  Heaven 
and  service  to  the  spirits.  As  they  loved  and  benefited  the 
people,  Heaven  and  the  spirits  rewarded  them,  appointing 
them  to  be  Sons  of  Heaven,  and  parents  of  the  people.  And, 
thereupon  people  praised  them,  calling  them  sage-kings  even 
unto  this  day.  These  then  were  those  that,  possessing  wealth 
and  position,  still  strove  after  virtues  and  were  rewarded. 
Now,  who  were  those  that,  possessing  wealth  and  position, 
^ Supra,  p.  38,  note  1. 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (II)  45 


yet  practised  evil  and  were  pnnislied  ? They  were  the 
wicked  kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,^  namely^  Chieh,  Chow, 
Yu,  and  Li.  How  do  we  know  they  were  those  ? When  they 
governed  the  empire  they  disliked  all  the  people  inclusively 
and  oppressed  them  and  led  them  to  curse  Heaven  and  the 
spirits.  Oppressing  and  destroying  the  people,  they  were 
punished  by  Heaven  and  the  spirits ; their  corpses  were 
mangled  and  lacerated,  their  children  and  grand-children 
were  scattered  and  dispersed,  their  family  hearths  were 
extinguished  and  descendants  exterminated.  And,  there- 
upon the  people  railed  at  them,  calling  them  wicked  kings 
even  unto  this  day.  These,  then,  are  those  that,  possessing 
wealth  and  position,  yet  practised  evil  and  were  punished. 

Now,  who  were  those  that  were  related  (to  the  ruler)  but 
not  virtuous  and  were  visited  by  punishment  ? Count  Kun  ^ 
was  of  direct  royal  descent  but  had  degenerated  in  the  royal 
virtues.  So  he  was  banished  to  the  wilderness  of  Yii  Yii 
where  (in  the  prison)  light  could  not  reach  him,  neither  did 
the  emperor  show  any  favour.  Such  was  he  who  was  related 
but  not  virtuous  and  was  visited  by  punishment.  Now,  who 
were  those  that  were  employed  by  Heaven  because  of  their 
capability  ? Yii,  Chi,  and  Kao  T’ao  were  they.  How  do 
we  know  that  ? It  is  found  in  the  Penal  Code  of  Lii  ”,  a 
book  of  an  early  king,  thus : The  Emperor  (Yao)  inquired 
among  his  subjects,  and  complaints  were  made  against  the 
Miaos  (barbarians).”  Again,  As  the  feudal  lords  have  been 
appointed  without  insight,  even  the  widows  and  the  widowers 
are  not  protected.  Dignity  is  revered  only  when  it  is 

^ Supra,  p.  41,  note  1. 

^ Kun  is  the  father  of  the  virtuous  Emperor  and  Great  Engineer  Yii. 


4:6 


THE  WOEKS  OE  MOTSE 


accompanied  witL.  magnanimity  ; enliglitemnent  is  respected 
only  when  it  is  accompanied  with  magnanimity.  Thereupon 
three  chiefs  were  commissioned  to  care  for  and  consolate  the 
people : (1)  Po  Yi  delivered  the  laws  and  statutes  and  taught 
therewith  the  people ; (2)  Yti  reduced  the  Flood  and  recovered 
the  land,  and  gave  names  to  hills  and  rivers  ; (3)  Chi  descended 
(from  his  rank)  and  sowed  seeds  to  encourage  good  farming. 
The  benefits  of  the  achievements  of  these  three  chiefs  all  fell 
upon  the  people.”  ^ This  is  to  say  that  the  three  sages  were 
careful  in  speech,  vigilant  in  conduct,  penetrating  in  thought, 
studying  and  planning  for  every  detail  and  benefit  of  the 
world — ^with  this  to  do  service  to  Heaven  on  high,  Heaven  will 
bless  their  virtue  ; to  bestow  it  to  the  people  below,  the 
people  will  be  visited  by  its  benefits  lasting  beyond  their 
lifetime. 

^ The  Penal  Code  of  Lii  ’ ' is  an  Essay  in  Shu  Ching.  Legge’s  translation 
shows  considerable  divergence  from  the  rendition  given  here.  The 
quotation  seems  to  be  lengthy  and  important  enough  to  be  given  a different 
version  for  comparison.  The  following  is  taken  from  Legge,  voL  iii, 
pp.  593-7 

“ Prom  the  princes  down  to  the  inferior  officers,  all  helped  with  clear 
intelligence  the  spread  of  the  regular  principles  of  duty,  and  the  solitary 
and  the  widows  were  no  more  disregarded.  The  great  emperor  with  an 
unprejudiced  mind  carried  his  inquiries  low  down  among  the  people,  and  the 
solitary  and  widows  laid  before  him  their  complaints  against  the  Meaos. 
He  sought  to  awe  (the  people)  by  his  virtue,  and  all  were  filled  with  dread, 
he  proceeded  (also)  to  enlightenthem  by  his  virtue,  and  all  were  enlightened. 
And  he  charged  the  three  chiefs  to  labour  with  compassionate  anxiety  in 
the  people's  behalf.  The  Baron  E delivered  the  statutes  (of  ceremony) 
to  prevent  the  people  from  rendering  themselves  obnoxious  to  punishment. 
Yu  reduced  to  order  the  water  and  the  land,  distinguishing  by  name  the 
hills  and  rivers.  Tseih  spread  abroad  a knowledge  of  husbandry,  so  that 
the  people  could  largely  cultivate  the  admirable  grains.  When  the  three 
chiefs  had  accomplished  their  work,  it  was  abundantly  well  with  the 
people." 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (II)  47 


Tkiis  .said,  tlie  ancient  kings:  - “Now,  tliis  way,  wken 
followed  broadly  to  govern  tke  world,  will  not  be  found  to 
be  too  slender ; when  followed  narrowly,  will  not  be  too 
unwieldly ; when  followed  with,  discretion,  will  benefit  the 
people  beyond  their  lifetime.”  Referring  to  it,  the  “ Eulogy  of 
Chou  ” sings  : “ The  virtue  of  the  sage  shining  upon  the  world 
is  lofty  as  Heaven,  wide  as  earth,  high  as  the  mountain, 
unbreakable  and  infallible  ; luminating  as  the  sun,  brilliant 
as  the  moon,  eternal  with  heaven  and  earth.”  This  is  to 
describe  how  enlightening  and  all-embracing,  deep-rooted 
and,  therefore,  permanent  is  the  virtue  of  the  sage.  Therefore 
the  virtue  of  the  sage  is  really  inclusive  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Now,  the  rulers  want  to  be  lord  over  the  empire  and  be 
head  of  the  feudal  lords.  But  how  can  it  be  done  without 
/ virtue  and  righteousness?  Their  way  must  be  by  over- 
; powering  and  overawing.  But  what  makes  them  adopt  this  ? 

' It  simply  pursues  the  people  to  death.  But  hfe  is  what  the 
I people  eagerly  desire,  and  death  what  they  greatly  dread. 
What  is  desired  is  not  obtained,  but  what  is  dreaded  befalls 
them  ever  so  often.  From  antiquity  to  the  present,  none 
has  yet  been  able  to  be  lord  over  the  empire  and  head  of  the 
feudal  lords  by  this  way.  Now  the  rulers  desire  to  be  lord 
of  the  world  and  head  of  the  feudal  lords  and  want  to  have 
their  ideas  prevail  all  over  the  world,  and  their  names 
established  in  posterity.  But  why  do  they  not  learn  that 
exaltation  of  the  virtuous  is  the  foundation  of  government  ? 
This  was  the  actual  conduct  of  the  sages. 


CHAPTER  X' 


EXALTATION'  'OF'  THE  VlETUOUS  (III) 

Motse  said  : All  tEe  riders  in  tEe  world  desire  tEeir  states 
to  be  wealtEy,  tEeir  people  to  be  inany>  and  tEeir  government 
and  jurisdiction  to  be  orderly.  But  tEey  do  not  understand 
to  govern  tEeir  states  and  people  by  exaltation  of  tEe  virtuous. 
TEey  Eave  missed,  indeed,  tEe  foundation  of  government. 
But  can  we  not  point  tEis  out  to  tEem  by  means  of  parallels  ? 
Now,  supposing,  in  governing  Eis  state,  a feudal  lord  sEould 
proclaim  : ^'All  tEose  wEo  can  sEoot  (witE  an  arrow)  and  drive 
(a  cEariot)  well  I sEall  reward  and  Eonour  ; all  tEose  wEo  can 
not  I sEall  punisE  and  disgrace.’’  If,  tEen,  we  sEouid  inquire 
among  tEe  people  of  tEe  state  as  to  wEo  would  rejoice  and 
wEo  would  be  afraid,  I suppose  naturally  tEose  wEo  could 
sEoot  and  drive  would  rejoice  and  tEose  wEo  could  not  would 
be  afraid.  I Eave  followed  tEis  (line  of  argument)  and  led 
tEem  supposedly  to  proclaim : ''  All  tEe  loyal  and  faitEful  ; 
I sEall  reward  and  Eonour ; all  tEe  disloyal  and  unfaitEful 
I sEall  punisE  and  disgrace.”  If  now  we  sEould  inquire  among 
tEe  people  of  tEe  state  as  to  wEo  would  rejoice  and  wEo 
would  be  afraid,  I suppose  naturally  tEe  loyal  and  faitEful 
would  rejoice  and  tEe  disloyal  and  unfaitEful  would  be  afraid. 
Therefore  tEe  state  and  tEe  people  are  to  be  governed  by 
exalting  tEe  virtuous,  so  that  those  in  the  state  that  do  good  i 
will  be  encouraged  and  those  that  do  evil  will  be  obstructed. 

To  govern  the  empire  seems  then  to  consist  of  encouraging 
the  good  and  obstructing  the  evil  But  why  is  it  that  I Eave 
esteemed  the  way  of  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu  ? ^ 


^ Supra,  p.  38,  note  1. 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (III)  49 


Because  tliey  administered  the  government  in  such  a way  that 
those  in  the  empire  that  did  good  would  be  encouraged  and 
those  that  did  evil  would  be  obstructed.  So,  then,  the  principle 
of  exaltation  of  the  virtuous  is  identical  with  the  way  of  Yao, 
Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu. 

The  gentlemen  ^ of  to-day  all  exalt  the  virtuous  in  their 
private  speech  and  conduct.  But  when  it  comes  to  the 
administration  of  the  government  for  the  public,  they  fail 
to  exalt  the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capable.  Then  I know 
the  gentlemen  understand  only  trifles  and  not  things  of 
significance. 

How  do  I know  it  is  so  ? 

Suppose  the  ruler  had  a cow  or  a sheep  which  he  could 
not  have  killed,  he  would  surely  look  for  a skilful  butcher. 
Or  if  he  wanted  a garment  which  he  could  not  have  made, 
he  would  surely  look  for  a skilful  tailor.  For  these,  the  ruler 
would  not  employ  his  relatives,  the  rich  without  merit,  and 
the  good-looking,  because  he  knew  clearly  they  were  incapable. 
He  was  afraid  they  would  spoil  the  things  to  be  attended  to. 
So,  in  these,  the  rulers  do  not  fail  to  exalt  the  virtuous  and 
employ  the  capable.  Again,  if  the  ruler  had  a sick  horse  that 
he  could  not  have  cured,  he  would  surely  look  for  an  ex- 
perienced veterinary  doctor.  Or  if  he  had  a tight  bow  which 
he  could  not  draw,  he  would  surely  look  for  a skilful  workman. 
For  these,  the  ruler  would  not  employ  his  relatives,  the  rich 
without  merit,  and  the  good-looking,  because  he  knew  clearly 
they  were  incapable.  He  was  afraid  they  would  spoil  the  things 

^ Meaning  the  learned  people  who  are  the  officials  and  advisers  to  the 
rulers. 


? 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


to  be  attended  to.  So,  in  these  matters  the  rulers  do  not  fail 
to  exalt  the  virtuous  and  employ  the  capable.  But  when  it 
comes  to  the  affairs  of  the  state  all  is  different.  The  relations 
of  the  rulers,  the  rich  without  merit,  and  the  good-iookino' 
are  all  promoted.  Then  does  it  not  seem  that  the  rulers  love 
their  states  not  even  as  much  as  they  love  a tight  bow,  a sick 

horse,  a garment,  or  a cow  or  a sheep?  Therefore  I know  the 

gentlemen  of  the  world  understand  only  trifles  and  not  things 
of  significance.  This  is  like  trjdng  to  make  messengers  of  the 
dumb  and  2n.usical  directors  of  tlie  deaf. 

To  the  contrary,  in  governing  the  empire  the  sage-kings 
of  old  enriched  and  honoured  those  who  were  not  necessarily 
then  relatives,  the  rich  without  merit,  or  the  good-looking. 

At  one  time  Shun  cultivated  land  at  Mt.  Li,i  made  pottery  by  ; 
* ® engaged  m fishing  in  Lake  Lei,i  and  went  peddling  i 
m Oh  ang  Yang.i  Yao  discovered  him  at  Fu  Tse,i  made  him 
emperor,  and  handed  him  the  government  of  the  empire  and 
the  rule  over  the  people.  Yi  Yin  ^ once  took  part  in  the  bridal  I 
party  of  the  daughter  of  the  Prince  of  Hsin,  and  then  was 
em^oyed  as  a cook.  Tang  discovered  him  and  exalted  him  to  : 
36  igh  Duke,  handing  him  the  government  of  the  empire  • 
md  the  rule  over  the  people.  Once  Fu  Yiieh  ^ lived  in  the  j 
Jistrict  of  Pe  Hai  i and  built  the  prison  walls.  His  clothing 
v-as  of  coarse  cloth  and  tied  with  ropes.  Wu  Ting  discovered 
urn  and  exalted  him  to  be  High  Duke,  handing  him  the 


Ancient  names  of  places  the  location  of  which 
■ra,  p.  33,  note  3 ; p.  43,  note  2. 

For  story  see  p.  33,  note  4. 

^OT  story  see  p.  43,  note  4. 


IS  now  quite  uncertain. 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIRTUOUS  (III)  51 


govemmerit  of  tbe  empire  and  the  rule  over  the  people.  Now, 
when  Yao  exalted  Shun,  T'ang  exalted  Yi  Yin,  and  Wu  Ting 
exalted  Fu  Yiieh  was  it  because  they  were  their  relatives, 
the  rich  without  merit,  or  the  good-looking  ? It  was  only 
because  that  by  adopting  their  views,  carrying  out  their 
plans,  and  following  their  ways,  Heaven  on  high  would  be 
blessed,  the  spirits  in  the  middle  would  be  blessed,  and  the 
people  below  would  be  blessed.  Therefore  they  were  promoted 
and  exalted. 

Having  understood  the  principle  of  exalting  the  virtuous 
in  government,  the  ancient  sage-kings  inscribed  it  on  bamboos 
and  silk  ^ and  engraved  it  on  the  dishes  and  vases, ^ to  hand 
it  down  to  their  descendants.  Thus  we  find  in  the  Penal  Code 
of  Lli  a book  of  an  ancient  king,-^  the  following  : The 
King  said : ‘ Ho  ! come,  ye  rulers  of  states  and  territories, 
I will  tell  you  how  to  make  punishments  a blessing.  Now  it 
is  yours  to  give  repose  to  the  people : — what  should  you  be 
most  concerned  about  the  choosing  of  ? Should  it  not  be 
proper  men  ? What  should  you  deal  with  the  most  reverently  ? 
Should  it  not  be  punishments  ? What  should  you  calculate 
the  most  ? Should  it  not  be  to  whom  they  should  reach  V ^ 
(This  is  to  say)  with  insight  in  choosing  men  and  considerate- 
ness in  meting  punishments,  you  can  catch  up  with  the  ways 

^ These  were  the  only  material  for  writing  in  those  ancient  days  in  China, 

^ Mottoes  and  maxims  were  often  cut  into  metal  or  stone  vessels 
usually  for  self -remindment. 

® p.  46,  note  1. 

^ This  refers  to  King  Mu  of  Chou  in  whose  reign  the  Code  was  made, 
951  B.c. 

^ The  translation  of  this  passage  is  entirely  taken  from  Legge,  voL  iii, 

p.  601. 


# 


52 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


of  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu.  Bow  ? By  exalta- 
tion of  the  virtuous.  Agaiainthebook  “ Shu  Nien”,i  another 
boob  of  an  ancient  Mng,  we  find : “ He  looked  for  wise  men 
to  protect  and  aid  you.”  ® This  is  to  say,  when  the  ancient 
kings  reigned  over  the  empire  they  invariably  selected  the 
virtuous  and  made  them  officials  and  aids. 


The  gentlemen  in  the  world  like  riches  and  honour,  and 
dislike  poverty  and  hmnility.  Now  how  can  you  obtain  the 
former  and  avoid  the  latter  ? There  is  no  better  way  than  to 
practise  virtue.  What  then  is  the  way  to  practise  virtue  ? 
Let  him  who  has  strength  be  alert  to  help  others,  let  him  who 
has  wealth  endeavour  to  share  it  with  others,  let  him  who 
possesses  the  Tao  (the  way  of  nature  and  life)  teach  others 
persuasively.  With  this,  the  hungry  will  be  fed,  the  cold 
will  be  clothed,  the  disturbed  will  have  order.  When  the 
hungry  are  fed,  the  cold  are  clothed,  and  the  disturbed 
have  order— this  is  procuring  abimdant  hfe.  But  those 
whom  the  rulers  now  are  enriching  and  honouring  are 
all  ^eir  relatives,  the  rich  without  merit,  and  the  good- 
looking.  What  can  there  be  that  guarantees  these  to  be 
wise  ? When  the  unwise  are  charged  with  the  government 
of  the  country,  disorder  in  the  country  can  be  predicted. 
Now  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  like  riches  and  honour, 
and  dislike  poverty  and  humihty.  But  how  can  you  obtain 
the  former  and  avoid  the  latter  ? There  seems  to  be  no 


EXALTATION  OF  THE  VIETUOUS  (III)  53 


other  way  than,  to  be  the  rulers’  relatives,  the  rich  without 
merit,  and  the  good-looking.  Evidently  one  cannot  become 
these  by  learning. 

So,  when  the  art  of  judging  is  not  understood,  although 
some  virtuous  people  may  even  compare  with  Yii,  T’ang, 
Wen,  and  Wu,  there  will  be  no  commendation.  And,  although 
a relative  of  the  ruler  may  be  lame  and  dumb,  deaf  and  blind, 
and  evil  like  Chieh  and  Chow,  there  will  be  no  condemnation. 
Therefore  reward  does  not  fall  on  the  virtuous  or  punishment 
on  the  evil.  As  those  rewarded  are  without  merit,  those 
punished  are  naturally  without  guilt.  And  so,  people  all 
became  disintegrated  in  heart  and  dissipated  in  body,  and 
despairing  in  doing  good.  With  all  their  strength  unused,  they 
would  not  help  one  another  ; with  all  unused  supplies  rotting 
and  fermenting,  they  would  not  share  with  one  another; 
hiding  the  excellent  Tao  they  would  not  show  it  to  others. 
As  a result  of  this,  the  hungry  are  not  fed,  the  cold  are  not 
clothed,  and  the  disturbed  are  not  given  order. 

In  the  days  of  old,  Yao  had  Shun,  Shun  had  Yii,  Yii  had 
Kao  T’ao,  T’ang  had  Yi  Yin,  Bang  Wu  had  Hung  Yao,  T’ai 
Tien,  Nan  Kung  K’uo  and  San  Yi  Sheng — ^therefore  the  world 
was  harmonious  and  people  were  prosperous.  And  those  near 
felt  contented  and  those  distant  were  attracted.  Wherever 
the  sun  and  the  moon  shone,  boats  and  vehicles  could  reach, 
rain  and  dew  visited,  and  life  depended  on  grains^;  few 
were  not  converted  (to  good)  by  this.  Hence  if  the  rulers  in 
the  world  now  desire  to  do  magnanimity  and  righteousness 

1 This  marks  ofi  the  civilized  world  from  the  barbarians.  The  modern 
phraseology  for  this  would  be,  ‘‘  where  civilization  has  attained  the 
agricultural  stage 


54  THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 

and  be  superior  men,  and  desire  to  strike  tbe  way  of  the  sage- 
kings  on  the  one  band  and  work  for  tbe  benefit  of  the  country 
and  tbe  people  on  tbe  other ; then  it  is  indispensable  that 
tbe  principle  of  Exaltation  of  tbe  Virtuous  be  understood. 
Now,  exaltation  of  tbe  virtuous  is  indeed  tbe  blessing  of 
Heaven,  tbe  spirits,  and  tbe  people,  as  well  as  tbe  foundation 
of  government. 


BOOK  III 

CHAPTEE  XI 

Identification  with  the  Supehiob  ^ (I) 

Motse  said : In  the  beginning  of  human  life,  when  there 
was  yet  no  law  and  government,  the  custom  was  everybody 
according  to  his  own  idea  ” Accordingly  each  man  had 
his  own  idea,  two  men  had  two  different  ideas  and  ten  men 
had  ten  different  ideas— the  more  people  the  more  different 
notions.  And  everybody  approved  of  his  oto  view  and 
disapproved  the  views  of  others,  and  so  arose  mutual  dis- 
approval among  men.  As  a result,  father  and  son  and  elder 
and  younger  brothers  became  enemies  and  were  estranged 
from  each  other,  since  they  were  tmable  to  reach  any  agree- 
ment. Everybody  worked  for  the  disadvantage  of  the  others 
with  water,  fire,  and  poison.  Surplus  energy  was  not  spent 
for  mutual  aid ; surplus  goods  were  allowed  to  rot  without 
sharing ; excellent  teachings  (Tao)  were  kept  secret  and  not 
revealed.  The  disorder  in  the  (human)  world  could  be 
^ In  Chinese  the  title  of  these  three  essays  is  literally  Superior  Identifica- 
tion m in-  Commentators  agree  in  interpreting  it  as  Identification 
with  the  Superior.  The  contents,  however,  seem  to  show  the  process  to  be 
both  ways.  Motse  advocates  an  identification  of  the  ruler  with  the  will  of 
the  poeple  as  much  as  one  of  the  people  with  that  of  Heaven.  The  real 
consistency  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  will  of  Heaven  is  embodied 
in  human  nature,  in  the  will  of  the  unspoiled  common  man.  “ Solidarity 
is  sometimes  used  for  this  title.  But  this  is  due  to  a misreading  of 
the  word  shang  which  here  stands  really  for  Shang  J:.  Therefore, 
1^  [r!  is  not  parallel  with  IpJ  title  of  the  last  three  chapters,  and  is 
not  translatable  into  “ Exaltation  of  Unity  or  “ Solidarity 

® The  Chinese  word  here  is  yi  ^ . It  occurs  many  times  in  the  next  three 
chapters.  Considerable  difficulty  is  experienced  in  making  a coherent 
translation  of  it.  Finally  the  effort  is  given  up,  and  it  is  rendered  differently 
as  notion  “ idea  ”,  view  purpose  ”,  and“  standard  ”,  in  different 
connexions. 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


compared  to  that  among  birds  and  beasts.  Yet  all  this  dis- 
order was  due  to  the  want  of  a ruler. 

Therefore  (Heaven)^  chose  the  virtuous  in  the  world  and 
crowned  him  emperor.  Feeling  the  insufficiency  of  his 
capacity,  the  emperor  chose  the  virtuous  in  the  world  and 
installed  them  as  the  three  ministers.  Seeing  the  vastness 
of  the  empire  and  the  difficulty  of  attending  to  matters  of 
right  and  mong  and  profit  and  harm  among  peoples  of  far 
countries,  the  three  ministers  divided  the  empire  into  feudal 
states  and  assigned  them  to  feudal  lords.  Feeling  the 
insufficiency  of  their  capacity,  the  feudal  lords,  in  turn,  chose 
the  virtuous  of  their  states  and  appointed  them  as  their 
officials.  When  the  rulers  were  all  installed,  the  emperor  issued 
a mandate  to  all  the  people,  saying : ‘MJpon  hearing  good  or 
evil  one  shall  report  it  to  a superior.  What  the  superior  thinks 
to  be  right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; what  the  superior  thinks 
to  be  wrong  all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  When  the  superior 
is  at  fault  there  shall  be  good  counsel,  when  the  subordinates 
show  virtue  there  shall  be  popular  recommendation.  To 
identify  one’s  self  with  the  superior  and  not  to  unite  one’s  self 
with  the  subordinates — ^this  is  what  deserves  encouragement 
from  above  and  praise  from  below.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
upon  hearing  good  or  evil  one  should  not  report  to  a superior ; 
if  what  the  superior  thought  to  be  right  one  should  not  think 
to  be  right ; if  what  the  superior  thought  to  be  wrong  one 

1 This  insertion  and  that  on  page  69  are  mine.  In  the  text  there  is  no 
subject  to  the  sentence — a peculiar  feature  of  Chinese  grammar,  I make 
this  insertion  ontheanthority  of  a parallel  passage  in  the  last  of  these  three 
synoptic  chapters  of  the  text,  p.  71.  This  point  is  dwelt  on  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  some  writers  incline  to  interpret  Motse's  origin  of  government 
as  a democratic  election.  Qi,  MoUe,  the  Neglected,  Rival  of  Confucius^ 
chap.  vi. 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR  (I)  57 

should  not  think  to  bo  wrong ; if  when  the  superior  was  at 
fault  there  should  be  no  good  counsel ; if  when  the  subordinates 
showed  virtue  there  should  be  no  popular  recommendation; 
if  there  should  be  common  cause  with  subordinates  and  no 
identification  with  the  superior— this  is  what  deserves  punish* 
ment  from  above  and  condemnation  from  below/’  The 
superior  made  this  the  basis  of  reward  and  punishment.  He 
was  clear-sighted  and  won  his  people’s  confidence. 

Now  the  head  of  the  village  was  the  most  high-minded 
and  tender-hearted  man  of  the  village.  He  notified  the  people 
of  the  village,  saying  : Upon  hearing  good  or  evil  you  shall 
report  it  to  the  head  of  the  district.  What  the  head  of  the 
district  thinks  to  be  right,  all  shall  think  to  be  right.  What 
he  thinks  to  be  wrong,  all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  Put  away 
from  your  speech  that  which  is  not  good  and  learn  his  good 
speech.  Remove  from  your  conduct  that  which  is  not  good 
and  learn  his  good  conduct.  How  then  can  there  be  disorder 
in  the  district 

Now,  how  was  order  brought  about  in  the  district  ? There 
was  order  in  the  district  because  the  head  could  unify  the 
standards  of  the  district.  The  head  of  the  district  was  the 
most  high-minded  and  tender-hearted  man  of  the  district. 
He  notified  the  people  of  the  district,  saying:  ''Upon 
hearing  good  or  evil  you  shall  report  it  to  the  lord.  What  the 
lord  thinks  to  be  right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; what  he 
thinks  to  be  wrong  all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  Remove  from 
your  speech  that  which  is  not  good  and  learn  his  good  speech. 
Take  away  from  your  conduct  that  which  is  not  good  and 
learn  his  good  conduct.  How  then  can  there  be  disorder  in 
the  state  ? ” 


58 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


ISTow,  how  was  order  brought  about  in  the  feudal  state  ? 
There  was  order  in  the  state  because  the  feudal  lord  could 
unify  the  standards  in  the  state.  The  lord  of  the  state  was 
the  most  high-minded  and  tender-hearted  man  of  the  state.  He 
notified  the  people  of  the  state,  saying  ; Upon  hearing  good 
or  evil  you  shall  report  it  to  the  emperor.  What  the  emperor 
thinks  to  be  right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; what  the  emperor 
thinks  to  be  wrong  all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  Take  away 
from  yoiur  speech  that  which  is  not  good  and  learn  his  good 
speech.  Kemove  from  your  conduct  that  which  is  not  good 
and  learn  his  good  conduct.  How  then  can  there  be  disorder 
in  the  empire  ? ’’ 

Now,  how  is  order  brought  about  in  the  empire  ? There 
was  order  in  the  empire  because  the  emperor  could  unify  the 
standards  in  the  empire.  If,  however,  the  people  all  identify 
themselves  with  the  Son  of  Heaven  but  not  with  Heaven 
itself,  then  the  jungle  ^ is  still  unremoved.  Now,  the  frequent 
visitations  of  hurricanes  and  torrents  are  just  the  punish- 
ments from  Heaven  upon  the  people  for  their  not  identifying 
their  standards  with  the  Will  of  Heaven.  Therefore,  Motse 
said : The  sage-kings  of  old  devised  the  five  punishments  ^ 
to  rule  the  people  in  order  to  be  able  to  lay  hands  on  those 
who  did  not  identify  themselves  with  their  superiors — a 
device  of  the  same  nature  as  threads  are  tied  into  skeins  and 
a net  is  controlled  by  a main  rope. 

1 Jungle  is  here  used  figuratively  for  disorder  in  contrast  to  cultivated 
land  as  order. 

2 The  five  punishments  differ  with  different  dynasties.  But  ordinarily 
they  refer  to  (1)  tattooing  on  the  face,  (2)  cutting  off  the  nose,  (3)  cutting 
off  the  feet,  (4)  castration,  and  (5)  death.  Most  of  them  have  long  fallen 
into  disuse. 


CHAPTER  XII 

Identification  with  the  Sijpeeior  (II) 

Motse  said  : As  we  look  back  to  the  time  when  there  was 
yet  no  rnlerj  it  seems  the  custom  was  “ everybody  in  the 
world  according  to  his  own  standard  Accordingly  each  man 
had  his  own  standard,  ten  men  had  ten  different  standards, 
a hundred  men  had  a hundred  different  standards — ^the  more 
people  the  more  standards.  And  everybody  approved  of  his 
own  view  and  disapproved  those  of  others,  and  so  arose  mutual 
disapproval.  Even  father  and  son  and  brothers  became 
enemies,  since  they  were  unable  to  reach  any  agreement. 
Surplus  energy  was  not  employed  for  mutual  help  ; excellent 
teachings  (Tao)  were  kept  secret ; surplus  goods  were  allowed 
to  rot  without  sharing.  The  disorder  in  the  (human)  world 
could  be  compared  with  that  among  birds  and  beasts.  The  lack 
of  regulations  governing  the  relationships  between  ruler  and 
subject,  between  superior  and  subordinate,  and  between  elder 
and  yoxmger;  and  the  absence  of  rules  governing  the 
relationships  between  father  and  son  and  between  older  and 
younger  brothers,  resulted  in  disorder  in  the  world, 

Emowing  the  cause  of  the  confusion  to  be  in  the  absence  of 
a ruler  who  could  unify  the  standards  in  the  world,  (Heaven)  ^ 
chose  the  virtuous,  sagacious,  and  wise  in  the  world  and 
crowned  him  emperor,  charging  him  with  the  duty  of  unifying 
the  wills  in  the  empire.  Having  been  crowned,  the  emperor, 
realizing  the  impossibihty  of  unifying  the  world  just  by 
his  own  senses  of  hearing  and  sight,  chose  the  understanding, 


60 


THE  WOBKS  OF  MOTSE 


virtuous,  sagacious,  and  wise  of  the  world  and  installed  them 
as  the  three  ministers,  sharing  with  them  the  duty  of  unifying 
the  standards  in  the  empire.  The  emperor  and  the  three 
ministers  being  in  office,  they  felt  the  vastness  of  the  empire 
and  the  difficulty  of  unifying  all  the  peoples  in  mountains 
and  woods  and  those  far  distant.  Therefore  they  systematically 
divided  up  the  empire,  and  appointed  numerous  feudal  lords, 
charging  these  with  the  duty  of  unifying  the  standards  in  each 
state.  The  feudal  lords  in  turn  felt  the  difficulty  of  unifying 
the  standards  in  their  states  just  by  their  own  senses  of 
hearing  and  sight.  Therefore  they  chose  the  virtuous  of 
the  state  to  be  their  ministers  and  secretaries  and  all  the 
way  down  to  the  heads  of  districts  and  villages,  sharing  with 
them  the  duty  of  unifying  the  standards  in  the  state. 

When  the  lords  of  the  country  and  the  heads  of  the  people 
had  been  appointed,  the  emperor  issued  mandates,  instructing 
the  people : ‘‘  Discovering  good  you  must  report  it  to  your 
superior,  discovering  evil  you  must  report  it  to  your  superior. 
What  the  superior  thinks  to  be  right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; 
what  the  superior  thinks  to  be  wrong  all  shall  think  to  be 
wrong.  When  there  is  virtue  among  the  people  there  shall 
be  popular  recommendation ; when  the  superior  is  at  fault 
there  shall  be  good  counsel.  You  shall  identify  yourself  with 
the  superior  and  not  associate  with  your  subordinates.  So 
doing,  one  deserves  encouragement  from  his  superiors  and 
praise  from  the  people.  On  the  other  hand,  if  upon 
discovering  good  you  should  not  report  it  and  upon  dis- 
covering evil  you  should  not  report  it  ; if  you  should 
not  think  to  be  right  what  the  superior  thinks  to  be  right, 
and  wrong  what  the  superior  thinks  to  be  wrong  ; if  there 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR  (II)  61 


should  be  norecomniendatioiiwhen  there  is  virtue  among  the 
people  and  no  good  counsel  when  the  superior  is  at  fault ; and 
if  you  should  unite  with  the  subordinates  but  differ  from 
the  superior— you  deserve  heavy  punishment  from  your 
superiors  and  condenmation  from  the  people/'  Therefore 
the  sage-Mngs  of  old  were  very  Judicious  and  faithful  in  their 
punishments  and  rewards.  And  so  all  the  people  aspired  to 
the  rewards  and  commendation  from  the  superior  and  dreaded 
his  condemnation  and  punishment. 

Thereupon,  in  accord  with  the  policy  of  the  emperor, 
the  village  head  proceeded  to  unify  the  purposes  in  the 
village.  Having  accomplished  this,  he  led  the  people  of  the 
village  to  identify  themselves  with  the  head  of  the  district, 
saying : ‘'All  you  people  of  the  village  are  to  identify 
yourselves  with  the  head  of  the  district,  and  are  not  to  imite 
with  the  subordinates.  What  the  head  of  the  district  thinks 
to  be  right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; what  he  thinks  to  be 
wrong  all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  Put  away  your  evil  speech 
and  learn  his  good  speech  ; put  away  your  evil  conduct  and 
learn  his  good  conduct.  For  the  head  of  the  district  is  naturally 
the  (most)  virtuous  of  the  district.  If  all  the  people  in  the 
district  follow  the  example  of  their  head,  how  then  can  the 
district  be  disorderly  ? " 

Now,  how  is  it  that  the  head  of  the  district  was  so  successful 
in  governing  the  district  1 It  was  just  because  he  could 
unify  the  purposes  of  the  whole  district  that  the  district 
was  so  orderly.  Having  accomplished  this  he  in  turn  led 
the  people  of  his  district  to  identify  themselves  with  the 
feudal  lord,  saying : “All  you  people  of  the  district  shall 
identify  yourselves  with  the  lord  of  the  state,  and  shall  not 


62 


THE  WOEKS'  /OF  MOTSE 


unite  with  the  suboidinates.  What  the  lord  thinks  to  be 
right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; what  he  thinks  to  be  wrong 
all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  Put  aw^ay  yom*  evil  speech  and 
learn  his  good  speech ; put  away  your  evil  conduct  and  learn 
his  good  conduct.  For  the  lord  of  the  state  is  natuxally  the 
(most)  virtuous  of  the  state.  If  all  the  people  in  the  state 
follow  the  example  of  their  lord,  how  then  can  the  state  be 
in  disorder  ? 

Now,  why  was  the  feudal  lord  so  successful  in  governing 
the  state  ? It  Tvas  just  because  he  could  unify  the  purposes 
in  the  state  that  the  state  is  orderly.  Having  accomplished 
this  he  in  turn  led  the  people  of  his  state  to  identify  them- 
selves with  the  emperor,  saying : All  you  people  of  the 
state  shall  identify  yourselves  with  the  emperor  and  shall 
not  unite  with  the  subordinates.  What  the  emperor  thinks 
to  be  right  all  shall  think  to  be  right ; what  he  thinks  to  be 
wrong  all  shall  think  to  be  wrong.  Put  away  your  evil  speech 
and  learn  his  good  speech ; put  avray  your  evil  conduct  and 
learn  his  good  conduct.  For  the  emperor  is  naturally  the 
(most)  high-minded  and  tender-hearted  man  of  the  empire. 
If  all  the  people  of  the  empire  follow  his  example,  how  then 
can  the  state  be  disorderly  ? 

Now,  why  was  the  emperor  so  successful  in  governing  the 
empire  ? It  was  just  because  he  could  unify  the  purposes  in 
the  empire  that  the  empire  is  orderly. 

But  to  carry  the  process  of  identification  with  the  superior 
up  to  the  Son  of  Heaven  and  not  further  up  to  Heaven  itself — 
then  the  jungle  ^ from  Heaven  is  yet  unremoved.  Thereupon 
Heaven  would  send  down  cold  and  heat  without  moderation, 

^ Figure  for  disorder.  Bupra^  p.  68,  note  L 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOE  (II)  63 


and  snow,  frost,  rain,  and  dew  nntimelj.  As  a result,  the 
five  grains  ^ could  not  ripen  and  the  six  animals  ^ could 
not  mature ; and  there  would  be  disease,  epidemics,  and 
pestilence.  Now  the  repeated  visitations  of  hurricanes  and 
torrents  are  just  punishments  from  Heaven — ^punishments 
to  the  people  below  for  not  identifying  themselves  with  it. 
Therefore  the  sage-kings  of  old  appreciated  what  Heaven 
and  the  spirits  desire  and  avoided  what  they  abominate,  in 
order  to  increase  benefits  and  to  avoid  calamities  in  the  world. 
With  purification  and  baths  ^ and  clean  wine  and  cakes  they 
led  the  people  to  make  sacrifice  and  libation  to  Heaven  and 
the  spirits.  In  such  services  to  the  spirits  they  dared  not 
use  wine  and  cakes  that  were  unclean,  sacrificial  animals 
that  were  not  fat,  or  jade  and  silk  that  did  not  satisfy  the 
standard  requirements.  The  proper  time  for  the  spring  and 
autumn  sacrifices  they  dared  not  miss.  Judging  lawsuits, 
they  dared  not  be  unjust.  Distributing  properties,  they  dared 
not  be  unfair.  Even  when  at  leisure  they  dared  not  be  dis- 
respectful. When  the  sage-kings  made  such  (good)  rulers, 
Heaven  and  the  spirits  commended  their  leadership  from 
above,  and  the  people  cherished  it  from  below.  To  work 
under  the  hearty  approval  of  the  Heaven  and  the  spirits  is 

1 Supra f p.  18,  note  1. 

2 Tlie  ‘‘six  animals  refer  to  (1)  horse,  (2)  ox,  (3)  sheep,  (4)  chicken, 
(5)  dog,  and  (6)  pig. 

2 This  purification  is  a preparation  to  make  the  person  fit  to  do  the 
sacrifice.  It  lasts  sometimes  three  days,  and  sometimes  even  seven  days. 
Clean  clothes  are  put  on  after  bathing.  Wine  and  meat  are  not  taken. 
It  is  expected  to  work  up  an  intense  concentration  of  attention  to  enable 
the  worshipper  to  come  into  contact  with  the  spirits.  For  a more  detailed 
discussion  on  this  point  cf.  Y.  P.  Mei : **  Ancestor  Worship — Origin  and 
Value,' ' Chinese  Students'  Monthly ^ vol.  xxi,  No.  6,  April,  1926,  p,  23. 


64 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


to  obtain  their  blessings.  To  work  nnder  the  appreciation  of 
the  people  is  to  obtain  their  confidence.  Administering  the 
government  like  this,  consequently  they  would  succeed  in 
planning,  accomplish  their  ends  in  executing,  be  strong  in 
defence  and  victorious  in  attack.  And  the  reason  for  all  this 
lies  in  their  employing  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the 
Superior  in  government.  And  this  is  how  the  sage-kings  of 
old  administered  their  government. 

People  might  then  ask : At  the  present  time  rulers  are 
not  absent  from  the  empire,  why  then  is  there  disorder  in 
the  empire  ? Motse  said  : The  political  leaders  of  the  present 
day  are  quite  diSerent  from  those  of  old.^  The  case  is  parallel 
to  that  of  the  Five  Punishments^  with  the  Prince  of  Miao.® 
In  ancient  times,  the  sage-kings  made  the  code  of  the  Five 
Punishments  and  put  the  empire  in  order.  But  wfien  the 
Prince  of  Miao  established  the  Five  Punishments  they 
unsettled  his  empire.  Can  it  be  that  the  Punishments  are 
at  fault  ? Really  the  fault  lies  in  their  application.  The 
Penal  Code  of  Lii  ” among  the  books  of  the  ancient  kings, 
says : Among  the  people  of  Miao  punishments  were  applied 
without  employing  instruction  and  admonition.  They  made 
a code  of  five  tortures  and  called  it  law,”  ^ This  is  to  say, 
those  who  know  how  to  apply  punishments  can  govern  the 
people  with  them.  And  those  who  do  not  know,  make  five 
tortures  out  of  them.  Can  it  be  that  the  punishments  are  at 
fault  ? Only,  when  their  application  is  not  to  the  point  do 

^ This  is  a very  explicit  reflection  on  the  political  conditions  of  the  time. 
® p.  58,  note  2- 

® The  name  of  an  aboriginal  tribe. 

* Compare  with  Legge,  vol.  iii,  p.  591. 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR  (II)  65 


they  become  five  tortures.  And,  also,  Shu.  Ling/’  ^ among 
the  books  of  the  ancient  kings,  says : The  same  mouth  can 
produce  friendship  or  produce  war.”  This  is  to  say  that  he 
who  can  use  the  mouth  well  will  produce  friendship,  and  he 
who  cannot  will  stir  up  the  enemies  and  the  besieging 
barbarians.  Can  it  be  that  the  mouth  is  at  fault  ? The  fault 
really  lies  in  its  use  which  stirs  up  the  enemies  and  the  besieging 
barbarians. 

Hence  the  installing  of  the  ruler  in  the  ancient  days  was 
intended  to  govern  ^ the  people.  Just  as  there  is  one  thread 
to  hold  together  the  others  in  a skein  and  a main  rope  to  a 
fishing  net,  so  the  ruler  is  to  hold  together  all  the  evil  and 
wicked  in  the  empire  and  bring  their  purposes  into  harmony 
(with  their  superiors) . Thus  ' ‘ Hsiang  Nien  among  the  books 
of  the  ancient  kings,  says : ''  Now  the  empire  is  established 
and  the  capital  is  located ; (Heaven)  installed  the  emperor, 
kings,  and  lords  not  in  order  to  make  them  proud,  and  (Heaven) 
appointed  the  ministers  and  the  oj0S.cials  not  in  order  to  make 
them  idle — it  was  to  apportion  duties  among  them  and  charge 
them  with  the  maintenance  of  the  Heavenly  justice.”  This 
is  to  say  that  when  God  and  the  spirits  in  the  past  established 
the  capital  and  installed  the  rulers,  it  was  not  to  make  their 
ranks  high,  and  their  emoluments  substantial,  and  to  give 
them  wealth  and  honour,  and  let  them  live  in  comfort  and 

^ Such  a title  does  not  exist  among  the  Essays  of  the  text  of  SMt  Ohing, 
This  sentence  is  now  found  in  the  essay  ‘'Counsels  of  Great  Yu*’,  Legge, 
voL  iii,  p.  63.  But  Sun  Yi- Jang  points  out  with  insight  that  the  quota- 
tion originally  belongs  to  the  "Charge  to  Yii”,  Legge,  vol.  iii,  p.  266. 

® The  Chinese  word  chih  ^ means  to  govern  and  also  to  govern  well, 
to  take  good  care  of  the  people. 

® Supra,  p.  42,  note  1. 

' ■■  'F.' 


66 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTS! 


free  of  care.  It  was  really  to  procure  benefits  and  eliminate 
adversities  for  tlie  people,  and  to  enricli  the  poor  and  increase 
the  few,  and  to  bring  safety  where  there  is  danger  and  to 
restore  order  where  there  is  confusion— it  was  for  this  that 
the  political  leaders  were  appointed.  And  so  the  ancient 
sage-kings  administered  their  government  accordingly. 

The  lords  at  the  present,  however,  do  Just  the  reverse. 
Administration  is  carried  on  to  court  flattery.  Fathers  and 
brothers  and  other  relatives  and  friends  are  placed  at  the 
right  and  left  and  appointed  rulers  of  the  people.  Knowing 
that  the  superior  appointed  the  rulers  not  for  the  welfare 
of  the  people,  the  people  all  kept  aloof  and  would  not  identify 
themselves  with  the  superior.  Therefore  purposes  of  the 
superior  and  the  subordinates  are  not  unified.  This  being 
so,  rewards  and  commendations  would  not  encourage  the 
people  to  do  good,  and  punishments  and  fines  would  not 
restrain  them  from  doing  evil. 

How  do  we  know  this  would  be  so  ? 

In  governing  the  country,  the  ruler  proclaims ; Whoever 
deserves  reward  I will  reward.”  Suppose  the  purposes  of  the 
superior  and  the  subordinates  are  different, whoever  is  rewarded 
by  the  superior  would  be  condemned  by  the  public.  And  in 
community  life  the  condemnation  of  the  public  is  supreme. 
Though  there  is  reward  from  the  superior,  it  will  not  be  an 
encouragement.  In  governing  the  country,  again,  the  ruler 
proclaims : Whoever  deserves  punishment  I will  punish.” 
Suppose  the  purposes  of  the  superior  and  the  subordinates 
are  different,  whoever  is  punished  by  the  superior  would  be 
applauded  by  the  public.  And  in  community  life  the  approval 
of  the  public  is  supreme.  Though  there  is  punishment  from 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR  (II)  67 


the  superior,  it  will  not  Tbe  an  obstruction.  Now,  in  governing 
tbe  country  and  ruling  tbe  people,  if  rewards  cannot  encourage 
tbe  people  to  do  good  and  punishments  cannot  restrain  them 
from  doing  evil,  is  this  not  just  the  same  as  in  the  beginning 
of  human  life  when  there  were  no  rulers  ? If  it  is  the  same 
with  rulers  or  without  them,  it  is  not  the  way  to  govern  the 
people  and  unify  the  multitude. 

As  the  ancient  sage-kings  could  observe  the  principle  of 
Identification  with  the  Superior,  when  they  became  rulers 
the  purposes  of  the  superior  and  the  subordinates  became 
interchangeable.  If  the  superior  reserved  for  himself  special 
facilities  the  subordinates  could  share  them.  If  the  people 
had  any  unrighted  wrongs  or  accumulated  injuries,  the 
superior  would  remove  them.  Therefore,  if  there  was  a 
virtuous  man  thousands  of  li  away,  though  his  clansmen 
did  not  all  know  it  (the  fact)  and  people  in  the  same  district 
did  not  all  know  it,  the  emperor  could  reward  him.  And  if 
there  was  an  evil  man  thousands  of  li  away,  though  his  clans- 
men did  not  all  know  it  (the  fact)  and  people  in  the  same 
village  did  not  all  know  it,  the  emperor  could  punish  him. 
Thereupon  all  the  people  in  the  world  were  astonished,  and 
carefully  avoided  doing  evil,  saying : “ The  emperor  is  like 
a spirit  in  his  hearing  and  sight.”  But  the  ancient  kings  said  : 

It  was  no  spirit  but  only  the  ability  to  make  use  of  others’ 
ears  and  eyes  to  help  one’s  own  hearing  and  sight,  to  make 
use  of  others’  lips  to  help  one’s  own  speech,  to  make  use  of 
others’  minds  to  help  one’s  own  thought,  to  make  use  of 
others’  limbs  to  help  one’s  own  actions.”  When  there  are  many 
to  help  one’s  hearing  and  sight  then  of  course  one  can  hear  and 
see  far  ; when  there  are  many  to  help  one’s  speech  then  one’s 


68 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


good  counsel  can  comfort  many  ; wlien  there  are  many  to  help 
one’s  thought  then  one’s  plans  can'  he  shaped  speedily  ; when 
there  are  many  to  help  one’s  actions  then  one  can  accoinplish 
one’s  undertaking  quickly.  ■ So  there  was  no  other  reason  for 
the  success  and  great  fame  of  the  ancient  sages  than  that  they 
could  carry  out  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the  Superior 
in  their  administration. 

One  of  the  Eulogies  of  Chou  ” among  the  works  of  the 
ancient  kings  says  : “ They  came  to  see  His  Majesty.  Daily 
they  sought  the  code  of  propriety.”  ^ This  describes  how  in 
times  of  old,  the  feudal  lords  came  to  the  emperor’s  court 
both  spring  and  autumn  to  receive  strict  instructions  from 
the  emperor  and  ruled  their  states  accordingly  when  they 
returned ; and  there  was  none  among  those  who  came  under 
such  an  administration  that  dared  not  submit  completely. 
And,  at  that  time,  none  dared  to  confuse  the  instructions 
from  the  emperor.  And  thus  runs  an  Ode : ‘‘  My  team 
is  of  white  horses  with  black  manes.  The  six  reins 
look  luxuriant.  They  trot  and  gallop.  The  considerations 
(of  the  emperor)  are  all-inclusive.”  ^ Further  : My  team  is 
of  dark  grey  horses.  The  six  reins  look  like  silk.  They  trot 
and  gallop.  The  plans  (of  the  emperor)  are  all-inclusive.”  ^ 

^ These  ai'e  the  first  two  lines  of  the  Ode  called  “ Tsai  Chien  " in 
SUh  OUng.  It  narrates  the  incident  of  a sacrifice  by  King  Ch'eng  in  the 
royal  ancestral  temple.  The  fihst  two  lines  describe  the  loyalty  shown  by 
the  feudal  lords  to  their  emperor  on  such  an  occasion.  According  to  Legge, 
voL  ir,  p.  691,  the  two  lines  read : 

“ They  appeared  before  their  Sovereign  King, 

To  seek  from  him  the  rules  (they  were  to  observe)." 

2 These  are  the  third  and  fourth  stanzas  in  the  reversed  order  of  the 
ode  called  Huang  Huang  Che  Hua  " in  Shih  Ching*  It  describes  and 


IDENTIFICATION  "WITH  SUPEEIOE  (II)  69 


TMs  is  to  say  tliat  upon  discovering  either  good  or  evil  the 
ancient  feudal  lords  always  hurriedly 'drove  to  the  emperor 
and  reported  it  to  him.  Therefore,  rewards  fell  upon,  the. 
virtuous  and  punishment  upon  the  wicked.  The  innocent 
was  not  prosecuted  and  the  .guilty  was  not  set  free.  And, all 
this  is  the  result'  of  practising  the  principle  of  Identification 
with  the  Superior. 

Therefore,  Motse  said  : Now,  if  the  rulers  and  the  gentle- 
men of  the  world  sincerely  desire  to  enrich  their  country  and 
multiply  their  people,  and  to  put  the  government  and  juris- 
diction in  order  and  stabilize  the  state — ^if  so,  then  they  can- 
not afford  to  fail  to  understand  the  principle  of  Identification 
with  the  Superior,  which  is  the  foundation  of  government, 

instructs  an  envoy  set  out  on  a mission.  The  two  stanzas  according  to 
iegge,  Toi.  iv,  p.  249,.  read:. 

“ My  horses  are  piebald ; 

The  six  reins  are  like  silk. 

I gallop  them  and  urge  them  on, 

Everywhere  seeking  information  and  counsel. 

My  horses  are  white  and  black-maned ; 

The  six  reins  look  glossy. 

I gallop  them  and  urge  them  on, 

Everywhere  seeking  information  and  advice.*’ 


'^CHAPTER  XIII  , , i 

Idektifigation  with  the  Soteeior  (III)  i 

: Motse  said  : The  interest  of  the  wise  (ruler)  lies  in  carrying 
out  what  makes  for  order  among  the  people  and  avoiding  what 
makes  for  confusion. 

But  what  is  it  that  makes  for  order  among  the  people  ? 

When  the  administration  of  the  ruler  answers  to  the  desires 
of  the  people  there  will  be  order,  otherwise  there  will  be 
confusion. 

How  do  we  know  it  is  so  ? 

When  the  administration  of  the  ruler  answers  to  the  desires 
of  the  subjects,  it  manifests  an  imderstanduig  of  the  approvals 
and  disapprovals  of  the  people.  When  there  is  such  an  under- 
standing, the  good  will  be  discovered  and  rewarded  and  the 
bad  will  be  discovered  and  punished,  and  the  country  will 
surely  have  order.  When  the  administration  of  the  ruler  does 
not  answer  to  the  desires  of  the  subjects,  it  shows  a lack  of 
understanding  of  the  approvals  and  disapprovals  of  the 
subjects.  When  there  is  no  such  understanding  then  the  good 
will  not  be  discovered  and  rewarded  and  the  bad  will  not  be 
discovered  and  punished.  With  the  good  unrewarded  and  the 
evil  unpunished,  such  a government  will  surely  put  the  country 
into  disorder.  Therefore  when  rewards  and  punishments  do 
not  answer  to  the  desires  of  the  people,  the  matter  has  to  be 
carefully  looked  into. 

But  how  can  the  desires  of  the  people  (being  so  many  and 
various)  be  met  ? 

Therefore  Motse  said : It  can  be  done  only  by  adopting  the 
principle  of  Identification  with  the  Superior  in  government. 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR’  (III)  71 


How  do  we  know  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the 
Superior  can  govern  the  empire  ? 

■Why  not  then  examine  the  administration  and  the  theory 
of  government  of  the  ancient  times  ? In  the  beginning  there 
was  no  ruler  and  everybody  was  independent.  Since  every  one 
was  independent,  there  would  be  one  purpose  when  there 
was  one  man,  ten  purposes  when  there  were  ten  men,  a hundred 
purposes  when  there  were  a hundred  men,  a thousand  purposes 
when  there  were  a thousand  men  and  so  on  until  the  number 
of  men  became  innumerable  and  the  number  of  different 
purposes  became  innumerable  with  it.  And  all  of  them 
approved  their  own  ideas  and  disapproved  those  of  others. 
And  there  was  strife  among  the  strong  and  struggle  among 
the  weak. 

Thereupon  Heaven  ^ wished  to  unify  the  standards  in  the 
world.  The  virtuous  was  selected  and  made  emperor.  Con- 
scious of  the  insufficiency  of  his  power  alone  to  govern  the 
empire,  the  emperor  chose  the  next  best  (in  virtue  and  wisdom) 
and  honoured  them  to  be  the  three  ministers.  Conscious 
of  the  insuflficiency  of  their  powers  alone  to  assist  the  emperor, 
the  three  ministers  in  turn  divided  the  empire  into  feudal 
states  and  assigned  them  to  feudal  lords.  Conscious  of  the 
insufficiency  of  his  power  alone  to  govern  all  that  were  within 
his  four  borders,  the  feudal  lord  in  turn  selected  his  next  beat 
and  commissioned  them  ministers  and  secretaries.  Conscious 
of  the  insufficiency  of  their  power  alone  to  assist  their  feudal 
lord,  the  ministers  and  secretaries  again  selected  their  next 
best  and  appointed  them  district  heads  and  clan  patriarchs. 

^ The  subject  becomes  explicit  here  while  it  is  omitted  in  the  last  two 
chapters,  p.  56;  note  1 ; p.  69»  note  1, 


72  THE  WOEKS  Of  MOTSE 

Therefore,  in  appointing  the  three  ministers,  the  feudal 
lords,  the  ministers  and  secretaries,  and  tlie  district  heads 
and  clan  patriarchs,  the  emperor  was  not  selecting  them 
for  wealth  and  honour,  leisure  and  ease.  It  was  to  employ 
them  to  help  in  administration  and  jurisdiction.  Hence,  when 
Heaven  established  the  empire  and  located  the  .capital  and 
commissioned  the  sovereign,  kings,  lords,  and  dukes,  and 
appointed  secretaries,  scholars,  professors,  and  elders — it  was 
not  to  give  them  ease,  but  only  to  divide  up  the  task  and  let 
them  help  carry  out  the  light  of  Heaven. 

Why  are  the  superiors  now  imable  to  govern  their  sub- 
ordinates, and  the  subordinates  unwilling  to  serve  their 
superiors  1 It  is  because  of  a mutual  disregard. 

What  is  the  reason  for  this  ? The  reason  is  a difierence  in 
standards.  Whenever  standards  differ  there  will  be  opposition. 
The  ruler  may  think  a man  good  and  reward  him.  The  man, 
though  rewarded  by  the  ruler,  yet  by  the  same  act  provokes 
the  condemnation  of  the  people.  Therefore  those  who  do  good 
are  not  necessarily  encouraged  by  rewards.  The  ruler  may 
think  a man  evil  and  punish  him.  This  man,  though  punished 
by  the  ruler,  yet  at  the  same  time  receives  the  approval  of  the 
people.  Therefore  those  who  do  evil  are  not  necessarily 
obstructed  by  punishments.  Thus  reward  and  honour  from 
the  ruler  cannot  encourage  the  good  and  his  denunciation 
and  punishment  cannot  prevent  the  evil.  What  is  the  reason 
for  this  ? The  reason  is  a difference  in  standards. 

But  how  can  the  standards  in  the  world  be  unified  ? 

Motse  said : Why  not  let  each  member  of  the  clan  organize 
his  purposes  and  identify  them  with  those  of  the  patriarch  ? ^ 

^ The  text  here  is  faulty.  This  reading  is  suggested  internally  by  the 
next  two  parallel  paragraphs. 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPEEIOR  (III)  73 

And  let  tlie  patriarch  give  laws  and  proclaim  to  the  clan: 

Whoever  discovers  a benefactor  to  the  clan  shall  report  it ; 
whoever  discovers  a malefactor  to  the  clan  shall  report  it. 
Whoever  reports  the  benefactor  of  the  clan  upon  seeing 
one  is  equivalent  to  benefiting  the  clan  himself.  Knowing 
him  the  superior  will  reward  him,  hearing  of  him  the  group 
will  praise  him.  Whoever  fails  to  report  a malefactor  of  the 
clan  upon  seeing  one  is  equivalent  to  doing  evil  to  the  clan 
himself.  Knowing  him  the  superior  will  punish  him,  hearing 
of  him  the  group  will  condemn  him.’’  Thereupon  all  the 
members  of  the  clan  wish  to  obtain  reward  and  honour  and 
avoid  denunciation  and  punishment  from  their  superior. 
Seeing  the  good  they  will  report ; seeing  the  evil  they  will 
report.  And  the  patriarch  can  reward  the  good  and  punish 
the  evil.  With  the  good  rewarded  and  the  evil  punished, 
the  clan  will  surely  have  order.  Now,  why  is  it  that  the  clan 
becomes  orderly  ? Just  because  the  administration  is  based 
on  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the  Superior. 

Now  that  the  clan  is  in  order,  is  that  all  there  is  of  the  way 
of  governing  the  feudal  state  ? 

By  no  means.  The  state  is  composed  of  many  clans.  They 
all  like  their  own  clan  and  dislike  other  clans.  And  there  is 
strife  among  the  strong  and  struggle  among  the  weak.  There- 
fore the  clan  patriarchs  should  again  organize  the  purposes 
in  the  clan  and  identify  them  with  those  of  the  feudal  lord. 
The  feudal  lord  also  should  give  laws  and  should  proclaim  to 
the  state  : Whoever  discovers  a benefactor  of  the  state 
shall  report  it ; whoever  discovers  a malefactor  of  the  state 
shall  report  it.  Whoever  reports  a benefactor  of  the  state 
upon  seeing  one  is  equivalent  to  benefiting  the  state  himself. 


74 


THl  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


Knowing  him  the  superior  will  reward  him,  hearing  of  him 
the  people  will  praise  him.  Whoever  fails  to  report  a male- 
factor of  the  state  upon  seeing  one  is  equivalent  to  doing  evil 
to  the  state  himself.  Knowing  him  the  superior  will  punish 
him,  hearing  of  liim  the  people  will  condemn  him.''  There- 
upon all  people  in  the  state  wish  to  obtain  reward  and  honour 
and  avoid  denunciation  and  punishment  from  their  superior. 
Seeing  the  good  they  will  report,  seeing  the  evil  they  will 
report.  And  the  feudal  lord  can  rewmrd  the  good  and  punish 
the  evil.  With  the  good  rewarded  and  the  evil  punished,  the 
feudal  state  will  surely  have  order.  Now,  why  is  it  that  the 
state  becomes  orderly  ? Just  because  the  administration  is 
based  on  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the  Superior. 

Now  that  the  feudal  state  is  in  order,  is  that  all  there  is  to 
the  way  of  governing  the  empire  ? 

By  no  means.  The  empire  is  composed  of  many  states. 
They  all  like  their  own  state  and  dislike  other  states.  And 
there  is  strife  among  the  strong  and  struggle  among  the 
weak.  Therefore  the  feudal  lord  should  again  organize  the 
purposes  in  the  state  and  identify  them  with  those  of  the 
emperor.  The  emperor  also  should  give  laws  and  should 
proclaim  to  the  empire : Whoever  discovers  a benefactor 
of  the  empire  shall  report  it ; whoever  discovers  a malefactor 
of  the  empire  shall  report  it.  Whoever  reports  a benefactor 
of  the  empire  upon  seeing  one  is  equivalent  to  benefiting  the 
state  himself.  Knowing  him  the  superior  will  reward  him, 
hearing  of  him  the  people  will  praise  him.  Whoever  fails  to 
report  a malefactor  upon  seeing  one  is  equivalent  to  doing 
evil  to  the  empire  himself.  Knowing  him  the  superior  will 
pxmish  him,  hearing  of  him  the  people  will  condemn  him." 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR  (III)  75 


Tlieieupoii  all  the  people  in  the  empire  will  wish  to  obtain 
reward  and  honour  and  avoid  denunciation  and  punishment 
from  their  emperor.  Seeing  the  good  and  the  evil  they  will 
report.  And  the  emperor  can  reward  the  good  and  punish 
the  evil.  With  the  good  rewarded  and  the  evil  punished,  the 
empire  will  surely  have  order.  Now  why  is  it  that  the 
empire  becomes  orderly  ? Just  because  the  administra- 
tion is  based  on  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the 
Superior. 

Now  that  the  empire  becomes  orderly,  the  emperor  will 
further  organize  the  purposes  in  the  empire  and  identify  them 
with  the  Will  of  Heaven. 

Therefore  Identification  with  the  Superior  as  a principle 
can  govern  the  empire  when  used  by  the  emperor,  it  can 
govern  the  state  when  used  by  the  feudal  lord,  and  it  can 
govern  the  clan  when  used  by  the  clan  patriarch.  To  be  found 
not  wanting  when  used  on  a large  scale  to  govern  the  empire, 
and  not  useless  when  employed  on  a small  scale  to  govern 
a clan — ^this  is  said  of  such  a principle.  Hence  the  proverb  : 

To  govern  the  world-empire  is  the  same  as  to  rule  a single 
family  clan ; to  command  all  the  people  in  the  world  is  the 
same  as  to  order  a single  individual.’^ 

Does  any  one  think  that  all  this  is  just  a fancy  of  Motse, 
and  that  this  teaching  did  not  exist  among  the  sage-kings 
of  old  ? Really  they  were  of  the  same  opinion.  All  the  sage- 
kings  administered  their  government  by  the  principle  of 
Identification  with  the  Superior,  therefore  the  world  became 
orderly.  How  do  we  know  it  is  so  ? It  is  recorded  in  the 

Grand  Oath  ” among  the  books  of  the  ancient  kings : If  an 
unscrupulous  man  discovers  a case  of  intrigue  and  deception 


76 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


and  fails  to  make  it  known,  he  shall  l)e  punished  equally.''  ^ 
This  is  to  say  that  whoeTeir  discovers  any  crime  and  does  not 
report  it  will  be  taken  ■ as  committing  a crime  of  the  same 

order. 

V , Therefore  in  governing  the  empire,  the  ancient  sage-kings 
chose  only  the  excellent  for  the  outposts  as  well  as  for  the 
offices  near  him.  As  there  were  many  , to  help  him  see  and 
hear,  he  succeeded  before  others  in  planning,  and  completed 
before  others  in  executing,  and  Hs  good  name  -was  spread 
before  others.  Just  because  he  could  trust  Ms  staS  in  the 
administration,  the  benefits  were  as  we  have  stated.  There 
is  an  ancient  proverb  saying  : The  sight  of  one  eye  cannot 
compare  with  that  of  two ; the  hearing  of  one  ear  cannot 
compare  with  that  of  two ; the  grasp  of  one  hand  cannot 
compare  with  that  of  two."  Now,  just  because  he  could 
trust  his  staff  in  the  administration  the  sage-king  received 
such  benefits.  Therefore  during  the  reign  of  the  ancient 
sage-king  over  the  empire,  if  there  was  a virtuous  man  more 
than  a thousand  li  away  he  could  reward  Mm  before  the  people 
in  the  same  district  and  village  all  got  to  know  it.  And  if 
there  was  a wicked  man  about  a thousand  li  away  he  could 
punish  him  before  the  people  in  the  same  district  and  village 
all  got  to  know  it.  Though  it  may  he  supposed  that  the  sage- 
king  was  keen  in  hearing  and  sight,  how  could  he  see  all  that 
is  beyond  a thousand  li  at  one  look,  how  could  he  hear  all  that 
is  beyond  a thousand  li  at  one  hearing  ? In  fact  the  sage- 
king  could  see  without  going  there  and  hear  without  being 

^ In  the  present  text  of  Shu  Ghing  this  quotation  does  not  appear.  Only 
the  last  clause  with  some  modification  is  found  in  the  Grand  Oath*'. 
Of.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  p.  287* 


IDENTIFICATION  WITH  SUPERIOR  (III)  77 


near.  Yet  wliat  kept  tlie  thieves,  robbers,  bandits,  and  high- 
waymen  moving  all  over  the  empire  without  being  able  to  find 
refuge  an3rwhere  ? There  is  the  beauty  of  adopting  the 
principle  of  Identification  with  the  Superior  in  government. 

Therefore  Motse  said : Whoever  orders  his  people  to 
identify  themselves  with  their  superior  must  love  them  dearly. 
For  the  people  will  not  obey  orders  except  when  they  are 
ordered  with  love  and  held  in  confidence.  Lead  them  with 
wealth  and  honour  ahead,  and  push  them  with  just  punish- 
ments from  behind.  When  government  is  carried  on  like 
this,  even  though  I wanted  to  have  some  one  not  to  identify 
himself  with  me,  it  would  be  impossible. 

Therefore  Motse  said  : If  the  kings,  dukes,  and  important 
personages  of  the  world  now  sincerely  want  to  practise 
magnanimity  and  righteousness  and  be  superior  men,  if  they 
want  to  attain  the  way  of  the  sage-kings  on  the  one  hand  and 
contribute  toward  the  benefit  of  the  people  on  the  other, 
they  cannot  leave  the  principle  of  Identification  with  the 
Superior  unexamined  and  un-understood:  Identification  with 
the  Superior  is,  indeed,  the  foundation  of  government  and 
essence  of  orderliness. 


BOOK  IV 

CHAPTER  XIV 

Uhiveesal  Lo?b  (I)  ^ ' j 

The  wise  man  who  has  charge  of  governing  the  empire  j 
should  know  the  cause  of  disorder  before  he  can  put  it  in 
order.  Unless  he  knows  its  cause,  he  cannot  regulate  it. 

It  is  similar  to  the  problem  of  a physician  who  is  attending 
a patient.  He  has  to  know  the  cause  of  the  ailment  before 
he  can  cure  it.  Unless  he  knows  its  cause  he  cannot  cure  it. 
How  is  the  situation  difierent  for  him  who  is  to  regulate 
disorder  ? He  too  has  to  know  the  cause  of  the  disorder 
before  he  can  regulate  it.  Unless  he  knows  its  cause 
he  cannot  regulate  it.  The  wise  man  who  has  charge  of 
governing  the  empire  must,  then,  investigate  the  cause  of 
disorder.  ^ 

Suppose  we  try  to  locate  the  cause  of  disorder,  we  shall  j 
find  it  lies  in  the  want  of  mutual  love.  What  is  called  disorder  ; 

is  just  the  lack  of  filial  piety  on  the  part  of  the  minister  : 

and  the  son  towards  the  emperor  and  the  father.  As  he 
loves  himself  and  not  his  father  the  son  benefits  himself 
to  the  disadvantage  of  his  father.  As  he  lo'ves  himself  and 
not  his  elder  brother,  the  younger  brother  benefits  himself 
to  the  disadvantage  of  his  elder  brother.  As  he  loves  himself 
and  not  his  emperor,  the  minister  benefits  himself  to  the 

^ TKis  chapter  has  been  translated  by  Legge  in  his  Prolegomena  to 
Memim  Ohimse  Classics,  vol.  ii.  His  translation  is  based  on  Pi 

Yuan  edition  of  the  text  which  is  inferior  to  Sun  Yi  Jang,  and  his  own 
reading  of  that  edition  is  also  incorrect  on  a few  points.  / 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE  (I) 


79 


disadvantage  of  his  emperor.  And  these  are  what  is  called 
disorder.  When  the  father  shows  no  affection  to  the  son, 
when  the  elder  brother  shows  no  affection  to  the  younger 
brother,  and  when  the  emperor  shows  no  affection  to  the 
minister,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  called  disorder.  When 
the  father  loves  only  himself  and  not  the  son,  he  benefits 
himself  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  son.  When  the  elder 
brother  loves  only  himself  and  not  his  younger  brother,  he 
benefits  himself  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  younger  brother. 
When  the  emperor  loves  only  himself  and  not  his  minister, 
he  benefits  himself  to  the  disadvantage  of  his  minister,  and 
the  reason  for  all  these  is  want  of  mutual  love.  * 

This  is  true  even  among  thieves  and  robbers.  As  he  loves 
only  his  own  family  and  not  other  families,  the  thief  steals 
from  other  families  to  profit  his  own  family.  As  he  loves 
only  his  own  person  and  not  others,  the  robber  does  violence 
to  others  to  profit  himself.  And  the  reason  for  all  this  is  want 
of  love.  This  again  is  true  in  the  mutual  disturbance  among 
the  houses  of  the  ministers  and  the  mutual  invasions  among 
the  states  of  the  feudal  lords.  As  he  loves  only  his  own  house 
and  not  the  others,  the  minister  disturbs  the  other  houses 
to  profit  his  own.  As  he  loves  only  his  own  state  and  not 
the  others,  the  feudal  lord  attacks  the  other  states  to  profit 
his  own.  These  instances  exhaust  the  confusion  in  the  world. 
And  when  we  look  into  the  causes  we  find  they  all  arise  from 
want  of  mutual  love. 

Suppose  everybody  in  the  world  loves  universally,  loving 
others  as  one’s  self.  Will  there  yet  be  any  unfilial  individual  ? 
When  every  one  regards  his  father,  elder  brother,  and  emperor 
i as  himself,  whereto  can  he  direct  any  unfilial  feeling  ? Will 


80 


THE^IWORKS  OF  MOTSl 


there  still  be  any  unaffeetionate  incliviclnal  ? When,  every 
one  regards  Hs  younger  brother^  son.,  and  niiiiistor  as  himself, 
whereto  can  he  direct  any  disaffection  ? Therefore  there 
will  not  be  any  nnfilial  feeling  or  disaffection.  Will  there 
then  be  any  thieves  and  robbers  ? When  every  one  regards 
other  families  as  his  own  family,  who  will  steal  ? When 
every  one  regards  other  persons  as  his  own  person,  who  will 
rob  1 Therefore  there  will  not  he  any  thieves  or  robbers. 
Will  there  be  mutual  disturbance  among  the  houses  of  the 
ministers  and  invasion  among  the  states  of  the  feudal  lords  ? 
When  every  one  regards  the  houses  of  others  as  one’s  own, 
who  will  he  disturbing  1 When  every  one  regards  the  states 
of  others  as  one’s  own,  who  will  invade  ? Therefore  there  will 
be  neither  disturbances  among  the  houses  of  the  ministers  nor 
invasion  among  the  states  of  the  feudal  lords. 

If  every  one  in  the  world  will  love  uiiivervsally ; states 
not  attacking  one  another;  houses  not  disturbing  one 
another ; thieves  and  robbers  becoming  extinct ; emperor 
and  ministers,  fathers  and  sons,  all  being  affectionate  and 
filial — ^if  all  this  comes  to  pass  the  world  will  be  orderly. 
Therefore,  how  can  the  wise  man  who  has  charge  of  governing 
the  empire  fail  to  restrain  hate  and  encourage  love  ? So, 
when  there  is  universal  love  in  the  world  it  will  be  orderly, 
and  when  there  is  mutual  hate  in  the  world  it  will  be  dis- 
orderly. This  is  why  Motse  insisted  on  persuading  people 
to  love  others. 


CHAPTER  XV 
Universal  Love  (II) 

Motse  said : The  purpose  of  the  magnanimous  is  to  be 
found  in  procuring  benefits  for  the  world  and  eliminating  its 
calamities. 

But  what  are  the  benefits  of  the  world  and  w’hat  its 
calamities  ? 

Motse  said  : Mutual  attacks  among  states,  mutual  usurpa- 
tion among  houses,  mutual  injuries  among  individuals.; 
the  lack  of  grace  and  loyalty  between  ruler  and  ruled,  the 
lack  of  affection  and  filial  piety  between  father  and  son, 
the  lack  of  harmony  between  elder  and  younger  brothers — 
these  are  the  major  calamities  in  the  world. 

But  whence  did  these  calamities  arise,  out  of  mutual 
love  ? 

Motse  said : They  arise  out  of  want  of  mutual  love.  At 
present  feudal  lords  have  learned  only  to  love  their  own  states 
and  not  those  of  others.  Therefore  they  do  not  scruple  about 
attacking  other  states.  The  heads  of  houses  have  learned 
only  to  love  their  own  houses  and  not  those  of  others.  There- 
fore they  do  not  scruple  about  usurping  other  houses.  And 
individuals  have  learned  only  to  love  themselves  and  not 
others.  Therefore  they  do  not  scruple  about  injuring  others. 
When  feudal  lords  do  not  love  one  another  there  will  be 
war  on  the  fields.  When  heads  of  houses  do  not  love  one 
another  they  will  usurp  one  another’s  power.  When 
individuals  do  not  love  one  another  they  will  injure  one 
another.  When  ruler  and  ruled  do  not  love  one  another 


82 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


they  will  not  be  gracious  and  loyal.  When  father  and  son 
do  not  love  each  other  they  will  not  be  affectionate  and  filial 
When  elder  and  younger  brothers  do  not  love  each  other 
they  will  not  be  harmonious.  When  nobody  in  the  world 
loves  any  other,  naturally  the  strong  will  overpower  the  w^eak, 
the  many  will  oppress  the  few,  the  wealthy  will  mock  the  poor, 
the  honoured  will  disdain  the  humble,  the  cunning  will  deceive 
the  simple.  Therefore  all  the  calamities,  strifes,  complaints, 
and  hatred  in  the  world  have  arisen  out  of  w-ant  of  mutual 
love.  Therefore  the  benevolent  disapproved  of  this  want. 

Wow  that  there  is  disapproval,  how  can  have  the 
condition  altered  ? 

Motse  said  it  is  to  be  altered  by  the  way  of  universal  love 
and  mutual  aid. 

But  what  is  the  way  of  universal  love  and  mutual  aid  ? 

Motse  said : It  is  to  regard  the  state  of  others  as  one’s 
own,  the  houses  of  others  as  one’s  own,  the  persons  of  others 
as  one’s  self.  When  feudal  lords  love  one  another  there 
will  be  no  more  war  ; when  heads  of  houses  love  one  another 
there  will  be  no  more  mutual  usurpation  ; when  individuals 
love  on^-afibther  there  will  be  no  more  mutual  injury.  When 
ruler  and  ruled  love  each  other  they  will  be  gracious  and 
loyal ; when  father  and  son  love  each  other  they  will  be 
affectionate  and  filial ; when  elder  and  younger  brothers 
love  each  other  they  will  be  harmonious.  When  all  the 
people  in  the  world  love  one  another,  then  the  strong  will 
not  overpower  the  weak,  the  many  will  not  oppress  the  few, 
the  wealthy  will  not  mock  the  poor,  the  honoured  will  not 
disdain  the  humble,  and  the  cunning  will  not  deceive  the 
simple.  And  it  is  all  due  to  mutual  love  that  calamities, 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE  (II) 


83 


strifes,  complaints,  and  hatred  are  prevented  from  arising. 
Therefore  the  benevolent  exalt  it. 

Bnt  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  would  say : So  far  so 
good.  It  is  of  course  very  excellent  when  love  becomes 
universal.  But  it  is  only  a difficult  and  distant  ideal.’’ 

Motse  said : This  is  simply  because  the  gentlemen  of  the 
world  do  not  recognize  what  is  to  the  benefit  of  the  world, 
or  understand  what  is  its  calamity.  Now,  to  besiege  a city, 
to  fight  in  the  fields,  or  to  achieve  a name  at  the  cost  of 
death — these  are  what  men  find  difficult.  Yet  when  the 
superior  encourages  them,  the  multitude  can  do  them. 
Besides,  universaMove  and  mutual  aid  is  quite  different 
from  these.  Whoever  loves  others  is  loved  by  others ; who- 
ever benefits  others  is  benefited  by  others ; whoever  hates 
others  is  hated  by  others  ; whoever  injures  others  is  injured 
by  others.  Then,  what  difficulty  is  there  with  it  (universal 
love)  ? Only,  the  ruler  fails  to  embody  it  in  his  government 
and  the  ordinary  man  in  his  conduct. 

Formerly,  Lord  Wen  of  the  state  of  Chin  (about  630  b.c.) 
liked  the  uncouth  uniform  of  the  soldier.  And  so  all  his 
ministers  and  officers  wore  sheepskin  jackets,  carried  their 
swords  in  leather  girdles,  and  put  on  silk-spun  hats.^  Thus 
attired,  they  attended  the  Lord  when  they  went  in  and  paced 
the  court  when  they  stayed  out.  What  was  the  reason  for 
this  ? It  was  that  what  the  ruler  encourages  the  ruled  will 
carry  out.  And  Lord  Ling  of  the  state  of  Ch’u  (about 
635  B.c.)  liked  slender  waists.  And  so  all  his  ministers  and 

^ These  hats  were  considered  very  plain  and  unbecoming  to  men  of  high 
position.  Cotton  is  cheaper  than  silk  to-day,  bnt  was  not  introdnced  into 
China  until  many  centuries  later. 


84 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


oj0S.cers  limited  themselves  to  a single  meal  (a  day).  They 
tied  their  belts  after  exhaling,  and  could  not  stand  np  without 
leaning  against  the  wall.  Within  a year  the  court  looked 
grim  and  dark.  What  was  the  reason  for  this  I It  was  that 
what  the  ruler  encourages  the  ruled  will  carry  out.  Again, 
Lord  Kou  Chien  of  the  state  of  Yiieh  (about  480  b.o.) 
liked  the  warrior’s  courage,  and  trained  his  subjects 
accordingly.  He  had  his  palace  boat  set  on  fire.  To  test 
his  soldiers  he  proclaimed  that  all  the  treasures  of  the  state 
were  contained  therein.  And  he  beat  the  drum  himself 
to  urge  them  on.  Hearing  the  dram  the  soldiers  rushed  on 
in  disorder.  More  than  a hundred  strong  perished  in  the 
flames.  Thereupon  the  Lord  beat  the  gong  to  let  them 
retreat. 

Therefore  Motse  said : Now,  things  like  scantily  died 
coarse  clothing  and  the  achievement  of  a name  at  the  cost  of 
death  are  those  in  which  people  find  difficulty.  Yet  when  the 
ruler  encourages  them  the  multitude  can  stand  them.  Besides, 
universal  love  and  mutual  aid  are  difierent  from  these.  Who- 
ever loves  others  is  loved  by  others  ; whoever  benefits  others 
is  benefited  by  others  ; whoever  hates  others  is  hated  by 
others  ; whoever  injures  others  is  injured  by  others.  Then 
what  difficulty  is  there  with  it  (universal  love)  ? Only, 
the  ruler  fails  to  embody  it  in  his  government  and  the 
ordinary  man  in  his  conduct. 

Nevertheless,  the  gentlemen  in  the  empire  think  that, 
though  it  would  be  an  excellent  thing  if  love  can  be 
universalized,  it  is  something  quite  impracticable.  It  is 
like  carrying  Mt.  T’ai  and  leaping  over  the  Chi  Eiver. 

Motse  said : The  illustration  is  a faulty  one.  Of  course 


UNIVBESAL  LOVE  (II) 


85 


to  be  able  to  carry  Mt.  T’ai  and  leap  over  tlie  CM  Eiver 
would  be  an  extreme  feat  of  strength.  Such  has  never 
been  performed  from  antiquity  to  the  present  time.  But 
universal  love  and  mutual  aid  are  quite  different  from  this. 
And  the  ancient  sage-kings  did  practise  it.  How  do  we  know 
they  did?  When  Yii  was  working  to  bring  the  Deluge 
under  control,  he  dug  the  West  Eiver  and  the  Yu  Ton  Eiver 
in  the  west  in  order  to  let  off  the  water  from  the  Ch'ii,  Sun, 
and  Huang  Eivers.  In  the  north  he  built  a dam  across 
the  Yuan  and  Ku  Eivers  in  order  to  fill  the  Hou  Chih  Ti 
(a  basin)  and  the  Hu  Ch'ih  Eiver.  Mt.  Ti  Chu  was  made 
use  of  as  a water  divide,  and  a tunnel  was  dug  through  Mt, 
Lung  Men.  All  these  were  done  to  benefit  the  peoples  west 
of  the  (Yellow)  Eiver  and  various  barbarian  tribes,  Yen, 
Tai,  Hu,  Ho,  of  the  north.  In  the  east  he  drained  the  great 
Plain  and  built  dykes  along  the  Meng  Ghu  Eiver.  The  water- 
course was  divided  into  nine  canals  in  order  to  regulate 
the  water  in  the  east  and  in  order  to  benefit  the  people 
of  the  District  of  Chi.^  In  the  south  he  completed  the 
Yangtze,  Han,  Huai,  and  Ju  Eivers.  These  ran  eastward 
and  emptied  themselves  into  the  Eive  Lakes.  This  was 
done  in  order  to  benefit  the  peoples  of  Ching,  Ch’u,  Kan, 
Yiieh,  and  the  barbarians  of  the  south.  All  these  are  the 
deeds  of  Yii.  We  can,  then,  universalize  love  in  conduct. 

When  King  Wen  was  ruling  the  Western  land,  he  shone 
forth  like  the  sun  and  the  moon  all  over  the  four  quarters 
as  well  as  in  the  Western  land.  He  did  not  allow  the  big 
state  to  oppress  the  small  state,  he  did  not  allow  the  multitude 
to  oppress  the  single-handed,  he  did  not  allow  the  influential 
^ China  proper  at  that  time. 


86 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


and  strong  to  take  away  the  grain  and  liye  stock  from  the 
farmers.  Heaven  visited  iiim  with  blessing.  And,  therefore, 
the  old  and  childless  had  the  wherewithal  to  spend  their 
old  age,  the  solitary  and  brotherless  had  the  opportunity 
to  join  in  the  social  life  of  men,  and  the  orphans  had  the 
support  for  their  growth.  This  was  what  King  Wen  had 
accomplished.  We  can,  then,  universalize  love  in  conduct. 

When  King  Wu  was  about  to  do  service  to  Mt.  T’ai  it 
was  recorded  thus  : Blessed  is  Mt.  T’ai.  Duke  of  Chou 
by  a long  descent  is  about  to  perform  his  duty.  As  I have 
obtained  the  approval  of  Heaven,  the  magnanimous  arise 
to  save  the  people  of  Shang  Hsia  ^ as  well  as  the  barbarians 
(from  the  tyranny  of  Emperor  Chow).  Though  (Emperor 
Chow)  has  many  near  relatives,  they  cannot  compare  with 
the  magnanimous.  If  there  is  sin  anywhere,  I am  solely 
responsible.”  2 This  relates  the  deeds  of  King  Wu.  We 
can,  then,  imiversalize  love  in  conduct. 

Therefore  Motse  said : If  the  rulers  sincerely  desire  the 
empire  to  be  wealthy  and  dislike  to  have  it  poor,  desire  to 
have  it  orderly  and  dislike  to  have  it  chaotic,  they  should 
bring  about  universal  love  and  mutual  aid.  This  is  the  way 
of  the  sage-kings  and  the  way  to  order  for  the  world,  and 
it  should  not  be  neglected. 

1 Hsia  is  one  of  the  eulogistic  names  for  the  Chinese  or  China.  Shang 
Hsia,  then,  means  China  nnder  the  Shang  Dynasty. 

2 This  quotation  as  a whole  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  existing  texts  of 
the  classics.  The  last  two  sentences  are  found  in  the  “ Great  Declaration  " 
in  Shu  Ghing,  Legge  gives  a different  meaning  to  the  last  sentence.  A 
passage  in  “ The  Successful  Completion  of  the  War  shows  some 
resemblance  to  the  first  part  of  the  quotation.  But  this  essay  is  one  of 
the  most  noted  for  falsifications  in  the  whole  collection  of  Shu  Cliing.  The 
references  to  Legge  are  vol.  iii,  part  ii,  p.  292  and  pp.  312-13. 


CHAPTER  XVI 
Universal  Love  (III) 

; Motse  said  : . The  purpose  of  .the  magnanimous  lies  in 
procuring  benefits  for  the  world  and  eliminating  its  calamities. 
Now  among  all  the  current  calamities,  which  are  the  most 
important  ? The  attack  on  the  small  states  hj  the  large 
ones,  disturbances  of  the  small  houses  by  the  large  ones, 
oppression  of  the  weak  by  the  strong,  misuse  of  the  few  by 
the  many,  deception  of  the  simple  by  the  cunning,  disdain 
towards  the  humble  by  the  honoured— these  are  the  mis- 
fortunes in  the  empire.  Again,  the  lack  of  grace  on  the  part 
of  the  ruler,  the  lack  of  loyalty  on  the  part  of  the  ruled,  the 
lack  of  afiection  on  the  part  of  the  father,  the  lack  of  filial 
piety  on  the  part  of  the  son — ^these  are  further  calamities 
in  the  empire.  Also,  the  mutual  injury  and  harm  which 
the  unscrupulous  do  to  one  another  with  weapons,  poison, 
w'ater,  and  fire  is  still  another  calamity  in  the  empire. 

When  we  come  to  think  about  the  cause  of  all  these 
calamities,  how  have  they  arisen  ? Have  they  arisen 

out  of  love  of  others  and  benefiting  others  ? Of  course 

we  should  say  no.  We  should  say  they  have  arisen 

out  of  hate  of  others  and  injuring  others.  If  we  should 

classify  one  by  one  all  those  who  hate  others  and  injure 
others,  should  we  find  them  to  be  universal  in  love  or  partial  ? 
Of  course  we  should  say  they  are  partial.  Now,  since 
partiality  against  one  another  is  the  cause  of  the  major 
calamities  in  the  empire,  then  partiality  is  wrong. 

Motse  continued  : Whoever  critickes  others  must  have 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


something  to  replace  them.  Criticism  without  suggestion 
is  like  trying  to  stop  flood  with  flood  and  put  out  fire  with 
fire.  It  will  surely  be  without  worth. 

Motse  said : Partiality  is  to  be  replaced  by  universality. 
But  how  is  it  that  partiality  can  be  replaced  by  universality  ? 
Now,  when  every  one  regards  the  states  of  others  as  he  regards 
his  own,  who  would  attack  the  others’  states  ? Others  are 
regarded  lil^e  self.  When  every  one  regards  the  capitals 
of  others  as  he  regards  his  own,  who  would  seize  the  others’ 
capitals  ? Others  are  regarded  like  self.  When  every  one 
regards  the  houses  of  others  as  he  regards  his  own,  who 
would  disturb  the  others’  houses  ? Others  are  regarded 
like  self.  Now,  when  the  states  and  cities  do  not  attack  and 
seize  each  other  and  when  the  clans  and  individuals  do  not 
disturb  and  harm  one  another — is  this  a calamity  or  a benefit 
to  the  world  ? Of  course  it  is  a Benefit.  WTien  we  come 
to  think  about  the  several  benefits  in  regard  to  their  cause, 
how  have  they  arisen  ? Have  they  arisen  out  of  hate  of  others 
and  injuring  others?  Of  course  we  should  say  no.  We 
shouldsay  they  have  arisen  out  of  love  of  others  and  benefiting 
others.  If  we  should  classify  one  by  one  all  those  who  love 
others  and  benefit  others,  should  we  find  them  to  be  partial 
or  universal  ? Of  course  we  should  say  they  are  universal. 
Now,  since  universal  love  is  the  cause  of  the  major  benefits 
in  the  world,  therefore  Motse  proclaims  universal  love  is 
right. 

And,  as  has  already  been  said,  the  interest  of  the  magnani- 
mous lies  in  procuring  benefits  for  the  world  and  eliminating  its 
calamities.  Now  that  we  have  found  out  the  consequences 
of  universal  love  to  be  the  major  benefits  of  the  world  and 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE  (III) 


89 


the  consequences  of  partiality  to  be  the  major  calamities 
in  the  world  ; this  is  the  reason  why  Motse  said  partiality 
is  wrong  and  universality  is  right.  When  we  try  to  develop 
and  procure  benefits  for  the  world  with  universal  love  as 
one  standard,  then  attentive  ears  and  keen  eyes  will  respond 
in  service  to  one  another,  then  Ihnhs  will  be  strengthened 
to  work  for  one  another,  and  those  who  know  the  Tao  will 
untiringly  instruct  others.  Thus  the  old  and  those  who  have 
neither  wife  nor  children  will  have  the  support  and  supply 
to  spend  their  old  age  with,  and  the  young  and  weak  and 
orphans  will  have  the  care  and  admonition  to  grow  up  in. 
When  universal  love  is  adopted  as  the  standard,  then  such 
are  the  consequent  benefits.  It  is  incomprehensible,  then, 
why  people  should  object  to  universal  love  when  they 
hear  it. 

Yet  the  objection  is  not  all  exhausted.  It  is  asked : ‘‘  It 
may  be  a good  thing,  but  can  it  be  of  any  use  ? ” 

Motse  replied : If  it  were  not  useful  then  even  I would 
disapprove  of  it.  But  how  can  there  be  anything  that  is 
good  but  not  useful  ? Let  us  consider  the  matter  from  both 
sides.  Suppose  there  are  two  men.  Let  one  of  them  hold 
to  partiality  and  the  other  to  universality.  Then  the 
advocate  of  partiality  would  say  to  himself,  how  can  I take 
care  of  my  friend  as  I do  of  myself,  how  can  I take  care  of 
his  parents  as  my  own  ? Therefore  when  he  finds  his  friend 
hungry  he  would  not  feed  him,  and  when  he  finds  him  cold 
he  would  not  clothe  him.  In  his  illness  he  would  not  minister 
to  him,  and  when  he  is  dead  he  would  not  bury  him.  Such  is 
the  word  and  such  is  the  deed  of  the  advocate  of  partiality. 
The  advocate  of  universality  is  quite  unlike  this  both  in  word 


90 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


and  in  deed.  He  would  say  to  Mmself,  I liave  lieard  that 
to  be  a superior  man  one  should  take  care  of  his  Mend  as  he 
does  of  himself,  and  take  care  of  his  friend's  parents  as  his 
own.  Therefore  when  he  finds  his  friend  hungry  he  would 
feed  him,  and  when  he  finds  him  cold  he  would  clothe  him. 
In  his  sickness  he  would  serve  him,  and  when  he  is  dead  he 
would  bury  him.  Such  is  the  word  and  such  is  the  deed 
of  the  advocate  of  universality. 

These  two  persons  then  are  opposed  to  each  other 
in  word  and  also  in  deed.  Suppose  they  are  sincere 
in  word  and  decisive  in  deed  so  that  their  word  and 
deed  are  made  to  agree  like  the  two  parts  of  a tally,  and  that 
there  is  no  word  but  what  is  realized  in  deed,  then  let  us 
consider  further : Suppose  a war  is  on,  and  one  is  in  armour 
and  helmet  ready  to  join  the  force,  life  and  death  are  not 
predictable.  Or  suppose  one  is  commissioned  a deputy 
by  the  ruler  to  such  far  countries  like  Pa,  Yiieh,  Ch'i,  and 
Ching,  and  the  arrival  and  return  are  quite  uncertain.  Now 
(under  such  circumstances)  let  us  inquire  upon  whom  would 
one  lay  the  trust  of  one’s  family  and  parents.  Would  it 
be  upon  the  universal  Mend  or  upon  the  partial  friend  ? 
It  seems  to  me,  on  occasions  like  these,  there  are  no  fools 
in  the  world.  Even  if  he  is  a person  who  objects  to 
universal  love,  he  will  lay  the  trust  upon  the  universal 
Mend  all  the  same.  This  is  verbal  objection  to  the  principle 
but  actual  selection  by  it  — this  is  self-contradiction 
between  one’s  word  and  deed.  It  is  incomprehensible, 
then,  why  people  should  object  to  universal  love  when 
they  hear  it. 

Yet  the  objection  is  not  all  exhausted.  It  is  objected: 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE  (III) 


"91: 


Maybe  it  is  a good  criterion  to  choose  among  ordinary  men, 
but  it  may  not  apply  to  the  rulers. 

Let  us  again  consider  the  matter  from  both  sides. 
Suppose  there  are  two  rulers.  Let  one  of  them 
hold  partiality  and  the  other  universality.  Then  the 
partial  ruler  would  say  to  himself,  how  can  I take  care 
of  the  people  as  I do  of  myself  ? This  would  be  quite 
contrary  to  common  sense.  A man’s  life  on  earth  is  of  short 
duration,  it  is  like  a galloping  horse  passing  by.  Therefore 
when  he  finds  his  people  hungry  he  would  not  feed  them, 
and  when  he  finds  them  cold  he  would  not  clothe  them. 
When  they  are  sick  he  would  not  minister  to  them,  and  upon 
their  death  he  would  not  bury  them.  Such  is  the  word  and 
such  is  the  deed  of  the  partial  ruler.  The  universal  ruler 
is  quite  unlike  this  both  in  word  and  in  deed.  He  would 
say  to  himself,  I have  heard  that  to  be  an  upright 
ruler  of  the  world  one  should  first  attend  to  his  people 
and  then  to  himself.  Therefore  when  he  finds  his  people 
hungry  he  would  feed  them,  and  when  ho  finds  them 
cold  he  would  clothe  them.  In  their  sickness  he  would 
minister  to  them,  and  upon  their  death  he  would  bury 
them.  Such  is  the  word  and  such  is  the  deed  of  the 
universal  ruler. 

These  two  rulers,  then,  are  opposed  to  each  other  in 
word  and  also  in  deed.  Suppose  they  are  sincere  in  word 
and  decisive  in  deed  so  that  their  word  and  deed  are  made 
to  agree  like  the  two  parts  of  a tally,  and  that  there  is  no  word 
but  what  is  realized  in  deed,  then  let  us  consider  further  : 
Suppose,  now,  that  there  is  a disastrous  pestilence,  that  most 
people  are  in  misery  and  privation,  and  that  many  lie  dead 


92 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


in  ditches.^  (Under  such  circumstances)  let  us  inquire, 
if  a person  could  choose  one  of  the  two  rulers,  which  would 
he  prefer  ? It  seems  to  me  on  such,  occasions  there  are  no 
fools  in  the  world.  Even  if  he  is  a person  who  objects  to 
universal  love,  he  will  choose  the  universal  ruler.  This  is 
verbal  objection  to  the  principle  but  actual  selection  by 
it — ^this  is  self-contradiction  between  one’s  word  and 
deed.  It  is  incomprehensible;  then,  why  people  should 
object  to  universal  love  when  they  hear  it. 

Yet  the  objection  is  still  not  exhausted.  It  points  out  that 
universal  love  may  be  magnanimous  and  righteous,  but  how 
can  it  be  realized  ? Universal  love  is  impracticable  just  as 
carrying  Mt.  T ai  and  leaping  over  rivers.  So,  then,  universal 
love  is  but  a pious  wish,  how  can  it  be  actualized  ? 

Motse  replied : To  carry  Mt.  T’ai  and  leap  over  rivers 
is  something  that  has  never  been  accomplished  since  the 
existence  of  man.  But  universal  love  and  mutual  aid  has 
been  personally  practised  by  six  ancient  sage-kings. 

How  do  we  know  they  have  done  it  ? 

Motse  said  : I am  no  contemporary  of  theirs,  neither  have 
I heard  their  voice  or  seen  their  faces.  The  sources  of  our 
knowledge  lie  in  what  is  written  on  the  bamboos  and  silk, 
what  is  engraved  in  metal  and  stones,  and  what  is  cut  in  the 
vessels  to  be  handed  down  to  posterity.^ 

The  Great  Declaration  ’’  proclaims  : King  Wen  was 
like  the  sun  and  the  moon,  shedding  glorious  and  resplendent 
light  in  the  four  quarters  as  well  as  over  the  Western  land.” 

^ That  is,  without  means  to  he  buried  in  tombs.  To  have  the  dead 
properly  buried  is  a major  duty  of  the  son  and  the  ruler  of  the  dead  person. 

2 Bufra,  p.  51,  notes  1 and  2, 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE  (III) 


93 


TMs  is  to  say  tiiat  tlie  love  of  King  Wen  is  so  wide  and 
universal  tliat  it  is  like  the  sun  and  the  moon  shining  upon 
the  world  without  partiality.  Here  is  universal  love  on  the 
part  of  King  Wen ; what  Motse  has  been  talking  about  is 
really  derived  from  the  example  of  King  Wen. 

Moreover  it  is  true  not  only  in  the  “ Great  Declaration 
but  also  with  the  ''  Oath  of  Yii  ’’A  Yii  said  (therein) : 

Come  all  you  hosts  of  people,  take  heed  and  hearken  to  my 
words.  It  is  not  that  I,  a single  person,  would  willingly 
stir  up  this  confusion.  The  Prince  of  Miao  is  more  and  more 
unreasonable,  he  deserves  punishment  from  Heaven.  There- 
fore I lead  you  to  appoint  the  lords  of  the  states  and  go  to 
punish  the  Prince  of  Miao.’’  It  was  not  for  the  sake  of 
increasing  his  wealth  and  multiplying  his  felicitations  and 
indulging  his  ears  and  eyes  but  for  that  of  procuring  benefits 
for  the  world  and  eliminating  its  annoyances  that  Yii  went 
to  war  against  the  Prince  of  Miao.  This  is  universal  love 
on  the  part  of  Yii,  and  what  Motse  has  been  talking  about 
is  really  derived  from  the  example  of  Yii. 

Again  it  is  true  not  only  in  the  Oath  of  Yii  ” but  also 
with  the  Oath  of  T’ang  T’ang  said  : “ Unworthy 

Lii  presumed  to  do  sacrifice  with  a first-born  male  animal  to 
Heaven  on  high  and  mother  Earth,  saying,  ‘ Now  there  is  a 
great  drought  from  heaven.  It  happens  right  in  my,  Lii’s, 
time.  I do  not  know  whether  I have  wronged  Heaven  or 
men.  Good,  I dare  not  cover  up  ; guilt,  I dare  not  let  go — 
this  is  clearly  seen  in  the  mind  of  God.  If  there  is  sin 

1 This  title  does  not  appear  in  the  present  text  of  8hu  Ching.  Something 
similar  to  the  content  of  the  following  quotation  is  found  in  the  Counsels 
of  Yii”.  Of.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  pp.  64,  66. 


94 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


anywhere  hold  me  responsible  for  it ; if  I myself  am  guilty 
may  the  rest  be  spared/  ” ^ This  is  to  say  that  though  having 
the  honour  of  being  an  emperor  and  the  wealth  of  possessing 
the  whole  world,  T’ang  did  not  shrink  from  ofiering  himself 
as  sacrifice  to  implore  God  and  the  spirits.  This  is  universal 
love  on  the  part  of  T’ang,  and  what  Motse  has  been  talking 
aboiit  is  really  derived  from  the  example  of  T'ang. 

Still  again,  it  is  true  not  only  in  the  “ Oath  of  Yii  ’’  and 
the  Oath  of  T’ang  ’’  but  also  with  the  ''  Poems  of  Chou 
To  quote : “ the  way  of  the  (good)  emperor  is  wide  and 
straight,  without  partiality  and  without  favouritism.  The 
way  of  the  (good)  emperor  is  even  and  smooth,  without 
favouritism  and  without  partiality.  It  is  straight  like  an 
arrow  and  just  like  a balance.  The  superior  man  follows  it, 
(even)  the  unprincipled  looks  on  (without  resentment).’’ 
Thus  the  principle  that  I have  been  expounding  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  a mere  doctrinaire  notion.  In  the  past,  when 
Wen  and  Wu  administered  the  government  both  of  them 
rewarded  the  virtuous  and  punished  the  wicked  without 
partiality  to  their  relatives  and  brothers.  This  is  just  the 
universal  love  of  Wen  and  Wu.  And  what  Motse  has  been 
talking  about  is  really  derived  from  the  examples  of  Wen 
and  Wu.^  It  is  incomprehensible  then  why  people  should 
object  to  universal  love  when  they  hear  it. 

1 The  passage  is  not,  found  in  the  “ Oath  of  T'ang The  several 
sentences  are  scattered  through  the  “ Announcement  of  T'ang " in 
CMng.  Of.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  pp.  184-90. 

® This  reference  leads  us  to  look  for  the  quotation  in  Shih  CMng. 
But  it  is  not  there.  The  first  two  sentences  appear  in  the  “ Great  Plan  " 
in  Bhu  CMng.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  p.  331. 

® Altogether  four  ancient  kings,  Yii,  T'ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  are  cited.  The 
word  “ six  " in  the  introductory  paragraph,  p.  92,  to  this  section  seems 
to  be  due  to  the  oversight  of  some  copyist. 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE  (III) 


95 


Yet  the  objection  is  still  not  exhausted.  It  raises  the 
question,  when  one  does  not  think  in  terms  of  benefits  and 
harm  to  one’s  parents  would  it  be  filial  piety? 

Motse  replied  : Now  let  us  inquire  about  the  plans  of  the 
filial  sons  for  their  parents.  I may  ask,  when  they  plan  for  then 
parents,  whether  they  desire  to  have  others  love  or  hate  them  ? 
Judging  from  the  whole  doctrine  (of  filial  piety),  it  is  certain 
that  they  desire  to  have  others  love  their  parents.  Now, 
what  should  I do  first  in  order  to  attain  this  ? Should 
I first  love  others’  parents  in  order  that  they  would  love 
my  parents  in  return,  or  should  I first  hate  others’  parents 
in  order  that  they  would  love  my  parents  in  return  ? Of 
course  I should  first  love  others’  parents  in  order  that  they 
would  love  my  parents  in  return.  Hence  those  who  desire  to 
be  filial  to  one  another’s  parents,  if  they  have  to  choose 
(between  whether  they  should  love  or  hate  others’  parents), 
had  best  first  love  and  benefit  others’  parents.  Would  any 
one  suspect  that  all  the  filial  sons  are  stupid  and  incorrigible 
(in  loving  their  own  parents)  ? We  may  again  inquire  about 
it.  It  is  said  in  the  Ta  Ya  ” ^ among  the  books  of  the 
ancient  kings  : No  idea  is  not  given  its  due  value ; no 
virtue  is  not  rewarded.  When  a peach  is  thrown  to  us, 
we  would  return  with  a prune.”  This  is  to  say  whoever 
loves  others  will  be  loved  and  whoever  hates  others  will  be 
hated.  It  is  then  quite  incomprehensible  why  people  should 
object  to  universal  love  when  they  hear  it. 

Is  it  because  it  is  hard  and  impracticable  ? There  are 

^ “ Ta  Ya  " is  the  name  of  a group  of  odes  in  SMh  CUng.  Only  the  first 
two  lines  of  the  following  quotation  appear  in  the  ode  Yi  Legge,  vol.  iv, 
p.  514,  renders  it : 

“ Every  word  finds  its  answer; 

Every  good  deed  has  its  recompense.’* 


96 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

instances  of  even  mncli  Harder  tasks  done.  Formerly,  Lord 
Ling  of  the  state  of  Ching  ^ liked  slender  waists.  In  his  time 
people  in  the  state  of  Ching  ate  not  more  than  once  a day. 
They  could  not  stand  np  without  support,  and  could  not  walk 
without  leaning  against  the  wall.  Now,  limited  diet  is  quite 
hard  to  endure,  and  yet  it  was  endured.  WTiile  Lord  Ling 
encouraged  it,  his  people  could  be  changed  within  a generation 
to  conform  to  their  superior.  Lord  Kou  Chien  of  the  state 
of  Yiieh  admired  courage  and  taught  it  his  ministers  and 
soldiers  three  years.  Fearing  that  their  knowledge  had  not 
yet  made  them  efScient  he  let  a fire  be  set  on  the  boat,  and 
beat  the  drum  to  signal  advance.  The  soldiers  at  the  bead 
of  the  ranli:  were  even  pushed  down.  Those  who  perished  in 
the  flames  and  in  water  were  numberless.  Even  then  they 
would  not  retreat  without  signal.  The  soldiers  of  Yiieh 
would  be  quite  terri&ed  (ordinarily).  To  be  burnt  alive  is 
a hard  task,  and  yet  it  was  accomplished.  When  the  Lord 
of  Yiieh  encouraged  it,  his  people  could  be  changed  within 
a generation  to  conform  to  their  superior.  Lord  Wen  of 
the  state  of  Chin  liked  coarse  clothing.  And  so  in  his  time 
the  people  of  Chin  wore  suits  of  plain  cloth,  jackets  of  sheep 
skin,  hats  of  spun  silk,  and  big  rough  shoes.  Thus  attired, 
they  would  go  in  and  see  the  Lord  and  come  out  and  walk 
in  the  court.  To  dress  up  in  coarse  clothing  is  hard  to  do, 
yet  it  has  been  done.  When  Lord  Wen  encouraged  it  his 
people  could  be  changed  within  a generation  to  conform  to 
their  superior. 

Now  to  endure  limited  diet,  to  be  burnt  alive,  and  to 

^ Ching  and  Ch'ii  are  names  of  the  same  state  at  this  time.  In  chap,  xv, 


UNIVEESAL  LOVE  (III) 


97 


wear  coarse  clothing  are  the  hardest  things  in  the  world, 
yet  when  the  superiors  encouraged  them  the  people  could  be 
changed  within  a generation.  Why  was  this  so  ? It  was 
due  to  the  desire  to  conform  to  the  superior.  Now,  as  to 
universal  love  and  mutual  aid,  they  are  beneficial  and  easy 
beyond  a doubt.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  only  trouble  is 
that  there  is  no  superior  who  encourages  it.  If  there  is  a 
superior  who  encourages  it,  promoting  it  with  rewards  and 
commendations,  threatening  its  reverse  with  punishments, 
I feel  people  will  tend  toward  universal  love  and  mutual 
aid  like  fire  tending  upward  and  water  downwards — ^it  will 
be  unpreventable  in  the  world. 

Therefore,  universal  love  is  really  the  way  of  the  sage- 
kings.  It  is  what  gives  peace  to  the  rulers  and  sustenance 
to  the  people.  The  gentleman  would  do  well  to  understand 
and  practise  universal  love ; then  he  would  be  gracious  as 
a ruler,  loyal  as  a minister,  affectionate  as  a father,  filial  as 
a son,  courteous  as  an  elder  brother,  and  respectful  as  a 
younger  brother.  So,  if  the  gentleman  desires  to  be  a 
gracious  ruler,  a loyal  minister,  an  affectionate  father,  a 
filial  son,  a courteous  elder  brother,  and  a respectful  younger 
brother,^  universal  love  must  be  practised.  It  is  the  way  of 
the  sage-kings  and  the  great  blessing  of  the  people. 

^ Through  the  entire  treatment  of  universal  love,  and  especially  in  this 
summary  at  the  end,  the  Western  reader  must  be  missing  some  consideration 
of  the  relation  between  husband  and  wife,  mother  and  child.  Mother  is 
not  specified  because  in  parental  affection  she  enjoys  absolute  equality  with 
the  father.  Husband  and  wife  constitute  another  of  the  five  cardinal 
relations  in  Chinese  society.  But  that  relation  has  seldom  been  dwelt 
on  in  the  whole  body  of  literature,  because  the  Chinese  shares  with  his 
fellow- Orientals  in  a sense  of  restraint  about  such  natural  and  socio-biological 
matters.  The  author  is  perhaps  also  conscious  that  that  relation  will  take 
care  of  itself  when  the  others  all  follow  the  principle  of  universal  love. 


BOOK  V 


CHAPTER  XVII 

Condemnation  of  Offensive  War  (I)  ^ 

Suppose  a man  enters  tlie  orchard  of  another  and  steals 
the  other’s  peaches  and  plums.  Hearing  of  it  the  public 
will  condemn  it ; laying  hold  of  him  the  authorities  will 
punish  him.  Why  ? Because  he  injures  others  to  profit 
himself.  As  to  seizing  dogs,  pigs,  chickens,  and  young  pigs 
from  another,  it  is  even  more  unrighteous  than  to  steal  peaches 
and  plums  from  his  orchard.  Why  ? Because  it  causes 
others  to  suffer  more,^  and  it  is  more  inhumane  and  criminal. 
When  it  comes  to  entering  another’s  stable  and  appropriating 
the  other’s  horses  and  oxen,  it  is  more  inhumane  than  to  seize 
the  dogs,  pigs,  chickens,  and  young  pigs  of  another.  Why  ? 
Because  others  are  caused  to  suffer  more ; when  others  are 
caused  to  suffer  more,  then  the  act  is  more  inhumane  and 
criminal.  Finally,  as  to  murdering  the  innocent,  stripping 
him  of  his  clothing,  dispossessing  him  of  his  spear  and  sword, 
it  is  even  more  unrighteous  than  to  enter  another’s  stable 
and  appropriate  his  horses  and  oxen.  Why?  Because  it 

^ This  chapter  is  quoted  in  translation  in  entirety  by  Professor  Hn  Shih 
in  his  Tke  Development  of  the  Logical  Method  in  A ncient  Chinaypp,  69-71. 
There  is  hardly  any  difference  between  that  translation  and  this  one  except 
some  instances  of  choice  of  words  and  expressions-  The  reader  may  go 
to  that  reference  for  more  detailed  comparison. 

® A clause  seems  to  have  been  lost  here,  when  we  compare  this  sentence 
with  the  following  sentences  expressing  the  same  meaning.  The  correct 
text  here  seems  also  to  be,  Because  others  are  caused  to  suffer  more; 
when  others  are  caused  to  suffer  more,  it  is  more  inhumane  and  criminal."' 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAR  (I)  99 


causes  others  to  suffer  more  ; when  others  are  caused  to  suffer 
more,  then  the  act  is  more  inhumane  and  criminal 

All  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  know  that  they  should 
condemn  these  things,  calling  them  umighteous.  But  when 
it  comes  to  the  great  attack  of  states,^  they  do  not  know  that 
they  should  condemn  it.  On  the  contrary,  they  applaud 
it,  calling  it  righteous.  Can  this  be  said  to  he  knowing 
the  difference  between  righteousness  and  unrighteousness  1 

The  murder  of  one  person  is  called  unrighteous  and  incurs 
one  death  penalty.  Following  this  argument,  the  murder 
of  ten  persons  will  be  ten  times  as  unrighteous  and  there 
should  be  ten  death  penalties ; the  murder  of  a hundred 
persons  will  be  a hundred  times  as  unrighteous  and  there 
should  be  a hundred  death  penalties.  All  the  gentlemen 
of  the  world  know  that  they  should  condemn  these  things, 
calling  them  unrighteous.  But  when  it  comes  to  the  great 
unrighteousness  of  attacking  states,  they  do  not  know  that 
they  should  condemn  it.  On  the  contrary,  they  applaud 
it,  calling  it  righteous.  And  they  are  really  ignorant  of  its 
being  unrighteous.  Hence  they  have  recorded  their  judgment 
to  bequeath  to  their  posterity.  If  they  did  know  that  it  is 
unrighteous,  then  why  would  they  record  their  false  judgment 
to  bequeath  to  posterity  ? 

Now,  if  there  were  a man  who,  upon  seeing  a little  blackness, 
should  say  it  is  black,  but,  upon  seeing  much,  should  say  it  is 
white  *,  then  we  should  think  he  could  not  tell  the  difference 
between  black  and  white.  If,  upon  tasting  a little  bitterness 
one  should  say  it  is  bitter,  but,  upon  tasting  much,  should 

^ A few  words  seem  to  have  been  lost  in  this  clause.  The  correct  text 
seems  to  be  : “ The  great  unrighteousness  of  attacking  states." 


100 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


say  it  is  sweet ; then  we  should  think  he  could  not  tell  the 
difference  between  bitter  and  sweet.  Kow,  when  a little 
wrong  is  committed  people  know  that  they  should  condemn 
itj  but  when  such  a great  wrong  as  attacking  a state  is  com- 
initted  people  do  not  know  that  they  should  condemn  it. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  applauded,  called  righteous.  Can  this 
be  said  to  be  knowing  the  difference  between  the  righteous 
and  the  unrighteous  ? Hence  we  know  the  gentlemen  of 
the  world  are  confused  about  the  difference  between  righteous- 
ness and  unrighteousness. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

Condemnation  of  Offensive  Wae  (II) 

Motse  said : If  the  rulers  of  to-day  sincerely  wisli  to  b© 
careful  in  condemnation  and  commendation,  judicious  in 
rewards  and  punishments,  and  temperate  in  government  and 
jurisdiction ; ^ . 

Therefore  Motse  said  : There  is  an  ancient  saying  that,  | 

when  one  is  not  successful  in  making  out  plans  then  predict 
the  future  by  the  past  ^ and  learn  about  the  absent  from 
what  is  present.  When  one  plans  like  this  then  one  can 
be  intelligent.^ 

Now,  about  a country  going  to  war.  If  it  is  in  winter 
it  will  be  too  cold  ; if  it  is  in  summer  it  will  be  too  hot.  So 
it  should  be  neither  in  winter  nor  in  summer.  If  it  is  in 
spring  it  will  take  people  away  from  sowing  and  planting ; 
if  it  is  in  autumn  it  will  take  people  away  from  reaping  and 
harvesting.^  Should  they  be  taken  away  in  either  of  these 
seasons,  innumerable  people  would  die  of  hxmger  and  cold. 

And,  when  the  army  sets  out,  the  bamboo  arrows,  the  feather 
flags,  the  house  tents,  the  armour,  the  shields,  the  sword 
hilts — ^innumerable  quantities  of  these  will  break  and  rot 
and  never  come  back.  The  spears,  the  lances,  the  swords, 

^ The  text  of  this  paragraph  is  incomplete.  The  lost  clause  seems  to  run 
somewhat  like  this  : “ Thej?-  must  condemn  offensive  wars.''  Infra,  p.  i04r. 

2 The  same  idea  is  expounded  in  a passage  in  the  Confucian  Analects 
H'  !§■.  Of.  Legge,  vol.  i,  book  i,  p.  8. 

® This  paragraph  is  an  introduction  to  the  historical  argument  which  forms 
the  main  body  of  this  chapter. 

* Following  this  it  seems  there  should  be  the  sentence  : “ So  it  should 
be  neither  in  spring  nor  in  autumn." 


102 


THE  WORKS  OP  MOTSE 


the  poniards,  the  chariots,  the  carts — ^innimierable  quantities 
of  these  will  break  and  rot  and  never  come  back.  Then 
inmimerable  horses  and  oxen  will  start  out  fat  and  come  back 
lean  or  will  not  return  at  all  And  inniimeraMe  people  will 
die  because  their  food  will  be  cut  ofi  and  cannot  be  supplied 
on  account  of  the  great  distances  of  the  roads.  And 
innumerable  people  will  be  sick  and  die  of  the  constant 
danger  and  the  irregularity  of  eating  and  drinking  and  the 
extremes  of  hunger  and  over-eating.  Then,  the  army  will  be 
lost  in  large  numbers  or  enthely  ; in  either  case  the  number 
will  be  innumerable.  And  this  means  the  spirits  will  lose 
their  worshippers,  and  the  number  of  these  will  also  be 
innumerable. 

Why  then  does  the  government  deprive  the  people  of 
their  opportunities  and  benefits  to  such  a great  extent  ? 
It  has  been  answered : '‘I  covet  the  fame  of  the  victor  and 
the  possessions  obtainable  through  the  conquest.  So  I 
doit.” 

Motse  said : But  when  we  consider  the  victory  as  such, 
there  is  nothing  useful  about  it.  When  we  consider  the 
possessions  obtained  through  it,  it  does  not  even  make  up 
for  the  loss.  Now  about  the  siege  of  a city  of  three  li  or  a 
kuo  ^ of  seven  li — if  these  could  be  obtained  without  the  use  of 
weapons  or  the  killing  of  lives,  it  would  be  all  right.  But 
(as  a matter  of  fact)  those  killed  must  be  counted  by  the  ten 
thousand,  those  widowed  or  left  solitary  must  be  counted  by 
the  thousand,  before  a city  of  three  li  or  a kuo  of  seven  li 

All  Chinese  cities  until  very  recently  were  walled  in  for  protection. 
The  inner  wall  is  called  ch’eng**  m,  city,  or  city  wall,  and  the  onter 
wall  is  called  “ kuo 


I 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAK  (II)  103 

conld  bo  captured.  Moreover  the  states  of  ten  thousand 
chariots^  now  have  empty  towns  to  be  counted  by  the 
thousand j which  can  be  entered  without  conquest ; and  their 
extensive  lands  to  be  counted  by  the  ten  thousand 
(of  mu), ^ which  can  be  cultivated  without  conquest. 
So,  land  is  abundant  but  people  are  few.  Now  to  pursue 
the  people  to  death  and  aggravate  the  danger  feared  by 
both  superiors  and  subordinates  in  order  to  obtain  an  empty 
city — this  is  to  give  up  what  is  needed  and  to  treasure  what 
is  already  in  abundance.  Such  an  undertaking  is  not  in 
accordance  with  the  interest  of  the  country. 

Those  who  endeavour  to  gloss  over  offensive  wars  would 
say  : “In  the  south  there  are  the  lords  of  Ching  and  Yiieh, 
and  in  the  north  there  are  the  lords  of  Chh  and  Chin.  When 
their  states  w^ere  first  assigned  to  them,  they  were  but  a 
hundred  li  square  in  area,  and  but  a few  tens  of  thousands 
in  number  of  people.  By  means  of  wars  and  attacks,  their 
areas  have  increased  to  several  thousand  li  square  and  the 
people  to  several  million.  So,  then,  offensive  wars  are  not 
to  be  condemned.’’ 

Motse  said:  The  four  or  five  states  may  have  reaped 
their  benefits,  still  it  is  not  conduct  according  to  the  Tao.^ 
It  is  like  the  physician  giving  his  drugs  to  the  patients. 
If  a physician  should  give  all  the  sick  in  the  world  a uniform 
drug  among  the  ten  thousand  who  took  it  there  might  be 
four  or  five  who  were  benefited,  still  it  is  not  to  be  said  to 

^ The  size  and  power  of  a state  were  then  symbolized  by  the  size  of  its 
chariot  force.  The  states  that  Motse  here  had  in  mind  are  Ch'i,  Chin,  Ch'u, 
and  Yiieh.  /?///*«,  chapter  xix,  pp.  110  and  114. 

® A ‘'mu''  ==  I'  acre. 

® That  is,  the  correct  way,  the  universal  way. 


104: 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


be  a common  (commonly  beneficial)  medicine.  Thus  a filial 
son  will  not  give  it  to  his  parent  and  a loyal  minister  will 
not  give  it  to  his  king.^  After  the  empire  was  in  the  ancient 
time  divided  into  states  a great  many  of  them  died  of  attacks 
— the  earlier  cases  we  hear  of  through  the  ear,  the  recent 
cases  we  saw  by  the  eye.  How  do  we  know  it  is  so  ? In 
the  east  there  was  the  state  of  Chii.  It  was  a small  state 
situated  in  the  midst  of  big  states.  It  did  not  show’  respect 
and  obedience  to  the  big  states,  and  the  latter  therefore  did 
not  like  it  or  favour  it.  So,  on  the  east  Ytieh  cut  and 
appropriated  its  land  by  force,  and  from  the  w’est  Ch'i 
swallowed  it  up  altogether.  And  it  was  due  to  offensive 
wars  that  Chii  died  betw'een  two  big  states.  And  it  w^as  due 
to  offensive  war  too  that  in  the  south  Ch’en  and  Ts'ai  were 
extinguished  by  Wu  and  Yiieh.  And  it  was  also  due  to 
offensive  wars  that  in  the  north  Pii  T’u  Ho  perished  among 
Yen,  Tai,  Hu  and  Mo. 

Therefore  Motse  said : If  the  rulers  now  really  desire 
gain  and  avert  loss,  desire  security  and  avert  danger,  they 
cannot  but  condemn  offensive  wars. 

Those  who  endeavour  to  gloss  over  offensive  wars  would 
say  : These  states  perished  because  they  could  not  gather 
and  employ  their  multitudes.  I can  gather  and  employ  my 
multitudes  and  wage  war  with  them ; who,  then,  dare  to 
be  unsubmissive  ? ” 

Motse  said : You  might  be  able  to  gather  and  employ  your 

^ This  illustration  incidentally  reveals  the  trial  and  error  stage  of  medical 
practice  at  the  time.  Shen  Nung,  twenty-eighth  century  b.c.,  is  said  to 
have  tasted  the  various  herbs  himself  to  ascertain  then-  nature.  And  he  is 
still  the  patron  God  of  the  medical  profession  in  China. 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAR  (II)  106 


multitudes,  but  can  you  compare  yourself  with  the  ancient 
Ho  Lii  of  Wu  ? Ho  Lii  of  Wu  (about  610  b.c.)  in  the  ancient 
days  drilled  his  soldiers  seven  years.  With  armour  on  and 
weapons  in  hand  they  could  cover  three  hundred  li  (in  a day) 
before  encamping  (for  the  night).  Passing  Chu  Lin,  they 
emerged  at  the  narrow  Pass  of  Min.  They  engaged  in  battle 
(with  the  state  of  Ch’u)  at  Po  Chii.  Subduing  Ch’u,  (Ho  Lii) 
gave  audience  to  Sung  and  Lu.  By  the  time  of  Fu  Ch'ai,^ 
he  attacked  ChT  in  the  north,  encamped  on  the  Wen  River, 


fought  at  Ai  Ling  and  greatly  defeated  Ch'i  and  compelled 
surety  from  them  at  Mt.  T’ai.  In  the  east  he  attacked  Yiieh, 
crossing  the  Three  Rivers  and  the  Five  Lakes,  and  compelled 
surety  at  Kuei  Chi.  None  of  the  nine  tribes  dared  to  show 
disrespect.  Reaching  home,  however,  he  would  not  reward 
the  orphaned  or  give  to  the  numerous  rustics.  He  depended 
on  his  own  might,  gloated  over  his  success,  praised  his 
own  cleverness,  and  neglected  instructing  and  training  his 
people.  He  built  the  Monument  of  Ku  Su^  which  was  not 
completed  even  in  seven  years.  By  this  time  (the  people 
of  Wu)  felt  tired  and  disheartened.  Seeing  the  friction 
between  the  superior  and  the  subordinates  in  Wu,  Kou 
Chien  of  Ytieh  gathered  his  multitudes  to  take  revenge.  He 
broke  into  its  kuo  on  the  north,  moved  away  its  royal  boat, 
and  surrounded  its  palace.  And  thus  Wu  perished. 

Some  time  ago  Chin  had  six  ministers  and  Chih  Po  (about 
456  B.o.)  was  the  most  powerful.  He  considered  the  large 
area  of  his  land  and  the  great  number  of  his  people,  and 
desired  to  attack  the  feudal  lords  in  order  to  have  a rapid 


^ Ho  Lii's  son  (about  490  B.o.). 

2 Capital  of  the  state  of  Wu,  now  Soochow. 


106 


THE  WORKS  OP  MOTSl 


spread  of  Iiis  courageous  name  tluoiigli  war  and  battle.  So 
lie  ranked  his  brave  warriors  and  arranged  his  boat  and  chariot 
forces.  He  attacked  (the  house  of)  Chung  Hsing  and  seized 
it.  This  showed  to  him  that  his  plans  were  satisfactory. 
Then  he  attacked  Pan  and  totally  defeated  him.  Thus  he 
absorbed  three  families  into  one.  He  did  not  stop  even  there, 
but  surrounded  Minister  Hsiang  of  Chao  at  Chin  Yang.  By 
this  time  Han  and  Wei  came  together  and  deliberated, 
saying  : An  ancient  proverb  says  : ‘ When  the  lips  are 
removed  the  teeth  will  become  cold.’  The  house  of  Chao 
dying  in  the  morning  we  would  be  following  it  in  the  evening : 
the  house  of  Chao  dying  in  the  evening  we  would  be  following 
it  in  the  morning.  A poet  sings  : ‘ If  the  fish  would  not 
act  while  yet  in  water,  what  can  it  do  when  it  is  already 
placed  on  land  ? ’ ” Thereupon  the  three  ministers  worked 
with  united  strength  and  a single  mind,  opening  passes  and 
blazing  trails,  putting  on  armour  and  arousing  the  warriors. 
With  Han  and  Wei  from  without  and  Chao  from  within, 
they  battled  Chih  Po  and  totally  defeated  him. 

Therefore  Motse  said : An  ancient  proverb  says : “ The 
superior  man  would  not  go  to  water  hut  to  man  for  a mirror.^ 
In  water  as  a mirror  one  sees  only  one’s  face  ; in  man  as  a 
mirror  one  can  predict  good  and  bad  luck.”  Have  those  who 
now  regard  offensive  wars  as  beneficial  made  use  of  Chih 
Po’s  story  ? It  is  plainly  discernible  to  be  not  auspicious 
but  ominous. 


^ This  saying  is  found  in  the  “ Announcement  about  Drunkenness  ’’  in 
Shu  Cking.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  part  ii,  p.  409. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

Condemnation  of  Offensive  War  (III) 

Motse  said  : Wliat  does  the  world  now  praise  to  be  good  ? 
Is  not  an  act  praised  because  it  is  useful  to  Heaven  on  high, 
to  the  spirits  in  the  middle  sphere,  and  to  the  people  below  ? 
Certainly  no  other  reason  is  needed  for  praise  than  to  be 
useful  to  Heaven  on  high,  to  the  spirits  in  the  middle,  and 
to  the  people  below.  Even  the  stupid  would  say  it  is  praise- 
worthy when  it  is  helpful  to  Heaven  on  high,  to  the  spirits 
in  the  middle,  and  to  the  people  below.  And  what  the  world 
agrees  on  is  just  the  way  of  the  sage-kings. 

Now  the  feudal  lords  in  the  empire  still  attack  and  assault 
each  other.  This  is  to  praise  the  principle  without  under- 
standing its  real  meaning.  They  resemble  the  blind  man 
who  uses  with  others  the  names  of  black  and  white  but 
cannot  discriminate  between  such  objects.  Can  this  be  said 
to  be  real  discrimination? 

Therefore,  deliberating  for  the  empire,  the  ancient  wise 
men  always  considered  the  real  (meaning  of  the)  principles, 
and  acted  accordingly.  Hence  they  were  no  more  uncertain 
in  their  actions.  All  desires,  far  or  near,  were  satisfied, 
and  Heaven,  the  spirits,  and  the  people  were  all  blessed. 
Such  was  the  way  of  the  wise  men.  Governing  the  empire, 
the  ancient  magnanimous  men  always  worked  for  mutual 
satisfaction  with  the  large  states,  brought  the  empire 
into  harmony,  and  centralized  all  that  was  within  the 
four  seas.  Then  they  led  the  people  in  the  empire 
diligently  to  do  service  to  God,  hills  and  rivers,  and  the 


108 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSl 


spirits  and  ghosts.  Many  were  the  benefits  to  the  people 
and  great  was  their  success.  Thereupon  Heaven  rewarded 
them,  the  spirits  enriched  them,  and  the  people  praised  them. 
The  high  honour  of  Son  of  Heaven  was  conferred  upon  them 
and  the  great  wealth  of  the  whole  world  was  given  to  them. 
Their  names  partake  of  (the  permanence  and  greatness  of) 
Heaven  and  Earth  and  are  not  forgotten  even  to  this  day. 
Such  is  the  way  of  the  wise  and  such  is  the  way  by  which 
the  ancient  kings  came  to  possess  the  world. 

The  rulers  and  lords  of  to-day  are  quite  different.  They 
all  ranlc  their  warriors  and  arrange  their  boat  and  chariot 
forces ; they  make  their  armour  strong  and  weapons  sharp 
in  order  to  attack  some  innocent  state.  Entering  the  state 
they  cut  down  the  grain  fields  and  fell  the  trees  and  woods  ; 
they  tear  down  the  inner  and  outer  walls  of  the  city  and 
fill  up  the  ditches  and  ponds ; they  seize  and  Idll  the  sacrificial 
animals  and  burn  down  the  ancestral  temple ; they  kill 
and  murder  the  people  and  exterminate  the  aged  and  weak  ; 
they  move  away  the  treasures  and  valuables.  The  soldiers 
are  encouraged  to  advance  by  being  told  : To  suffer  death 
is  the  highest  (service  you  can  render),  to  kill  many  is  the 
next,  to  be  wounded  is  the  lowest.  But  if  you  should  drop 
out  from  your  rank  and  attempt  to  sneak  away,  the  penalty 
will  be  death  without  moderation.’'  Thus  the  soldiers 
are  put  to  fear. 

Now  to  capture  a state  and  to  destroy  an  army,  to  disturb 
and  torture  the  people,  and  to  set  at  naught  the  aspirations 
of  the  sages  by  confusion— is  this  intended  to  bless  Heaven  ? 
But  the  people  of  Heaven  are  gathered  together  to  besiege 
the  towns  belonging  to  Heaven.  This  is  to  murder  men 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAR  (III)  109 

of  Heaven  and  dispossess  the  spirits  of  their  altars  and  to 
ruin  the  state  and  to  kill  the  sacrificial  animals.  It  is  then 
not  a blessing  to  Heaven  on  high.  Is  it  intended  to  bless 
the  spirits  ? But  men  of  Heaven  are  murdered,  spirits  are 
deprived  of  their  sacrifices,  the  earlier  kings  ^ are  neglected, 
the  multitude  are  tortured  and  the  people  are  scattered; 
it  is  then  not  a blessing  to  the  spirits  in  the  middle.  Is  it 
intended  to  bless  the  people  ? But  the  blessing  of  the  people 
by  killing  them  off  must  be  very  meagre.  And  when  we 
calculate  the  expense,  which  is  the  root  of  the  calamities 
to  living,^  we  find  the  property  of  innumerable  people  is 
exhausted.  It  is,  then,  not  a blessing  to  the  people  below 
either. 

Now  that  the  armies  are  intended  for  mutual  destruction, 
it  is  evident : If  the  general  be  not  courageous,  if  soldiers 
be  not  brave,  if  weapons  be  not  sharp,  if  drills  be  not  frequent, 
if  the  force  be  not  large,  if  generals  be  not  harmonious,  if 
power  be  not  august,  if  a siege  be  not  enduring,  if  an  assault 
be  not  speedy,  if  people  be  not  strongly  bound  together, 
if  determination  be  not  firm — ^if  this  be  so,  the  (other)  feudal 
lords  will  suspect.  When  feudal  lords  entertain  suspicion, 
enemies  will  be  stirred  up  and  cause  anxiety,  and  the  morale 
will  be  weakened.  On  the  other  hand,  if  every  preparation 
is  in  good  shape  and  the  state  goes  out  to  engage  in  war, 
then  the  state  will  lose  its  men  and  the  people  will  neglect 
their  vocations.  Have  we  not  heard  it  said  that,  when  a 
warring  state  goes  on  an  expedition,  of  the  officers  there 

1 Meaning  the  ancestral  spirits  of  the  state. 

^ This  is  an  explicit  expression  of  the  common  Chinese  attitude  towards 
the  government  as  a mere  tax-collecting  agency. 


no 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


must  be  several  bundred,  of  tb©  conimon  people  there  must  be 
several  thousand,  and  of  the  soldiers  and  prisoners  there 
must  be  ten  thousand,  before  the  army  can  set  out  ? It  may 
last  for  several  years,  or,  at  the  shortest,  several  months. 
So,  the  superior  will  have  no  time  to  attend  to  government, 
the  ofScials  will  have  no  time  to  attend  to  their  offices,  the 
farmers  will  have  no  time  to  sow  or  reap,  the  w-omen  will 
have  no  time  to  weave  or  spin : that  is,  the  state  will  lose 
its  men  and  the  people  will  neglect  their  vocations.  Besides, 
the  chariots  wdll  break  and  horses  will  be  exhausted.  As 
to  tents,  army  supplies,  and  soldiers’  equipment — if  one- 
fifth  of  these  can  remain  (after  the  war)  it  would  already 
be  beyond  expectation.  Moreover,  innumerable  men  will 
be  missing  and  lost  on  the  way,  and  will  become  sick  from  the 
long  distances,  meagre  rations,  hunger  and  cold,  and  die  in 
the  ditches.  Now  the  calamity  to  the  people  and  the  world 
is  tremendous.  Yet  the  rulers  enjoy  doing  it.  This  means 
they  enjoy  injuring  and  exterminating  the  people ; is  this 
not  perversity  ? 

The  most  w^arring  states  in  the  empire  tO“day  are  Ch’i, 
Chin,  Ch’u,  and  Yxieh.  These  four  states  are  all  successful 
in  the  world.  Even  if  their  people  be  increased  tenfold, 
still  they  could  not  consume  all  that  their  land  could  produce. 
That  is,  they  are  in  need  of  men  while  they  have  a surplus 
of  land.  Still  they  strove  against  each  other  to  possess  more 
land.  This  is  to  neglect  what  is  needed  and  to  value  what 
is  already  in  plenty. 

The  warring  lords  would  gloss  over  (their  conduct)  with 
arguments  to  confute  Motse,  saying : ‘‘Do  you  condemn 
attack  and  assault  as  unrighteous  and  not  beneficial  ? But, 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAB  (III)  111 


anciently,  Yii  made  war  on  the  Prince  of  Miao,  T’ang  on 
Chieh,  and  King  Wu  on  Chow.  Yet  these  are  regarded  as 
sages.  What  is  your  explanation  for  this  ? Motse  said  : 
You  have  not  examined  the  terminology  of  my  teaching  and 
you  do  not  understand  its  motive.  What  they  did  is  not 
to  be  called  ''  attack  ’’  but punishment 
Anciently,  the  three  Miao  tribes  were  in  great  confusion. 
Heaven  ordered  their  destruction.  The  sun  rose  at  night. 
It  rained  blood  for  three  days.  Dragons  emerged  in  the 
temple  and  dogs  cried  in  the  market  place.  Ice  came  in 
summer  and  earth  cracked  until  water  gushed  forth.  The 
five  grains  appeared  in  mutation.  At  these,  the  people  were 
greatly  shocked.  Kao  Yang>  then  gave  command  (to  Yii)  ^ 
in  the  Yuan  Palace.  Yii  held  the  imperial  jade  order  in 
hand  and  set  forth  to  conquer  Miao.  Amidst  thunder  and 
lightning,  a god  with  the  face  of  a man  and  the  body  of 
a bird  was  revealed  to  be  waiting  upon  (Yii)  with  the  kuei  ^ 
in  hand.  The  general  of  Miao  was  brought  down  by  an  arrow,® 
and  the  Miao  army  was  set  in  great  confusion.  And  the  Miao 
tribes  became  less  and  less  significant  ever  after.  Having 
conquered  Miao,  Yii  set  apart  the  hills  and  rivers  (by  names), 
and  ordered  things  into  high  and  low.  With  sacrifices  he 

^ Kao  Yang  is  an  ancestor  of  Shun  of  the  sixth  generation.  The  insertion 
“ (to  Yii)  " is  made  because  this  paragraph  is  intended  to  cite  the  circum- 
stances under  which  Yii  made  war  on  the  three  Miao  tribes.  JBut  if  this  is 
a story  about  Yii,  then  Kao  Yang  cannot  appear  in  this  connexion,  as  Yii 
is  a later  contemporary  of  Shun.  The  details  of  the  whole  story  sound 
fictitious.  More  explanatory  sentences  seem  to  have  been  lost  from  the  text. 

® Kuei  ^ is  a tablet  of  jade  or  ivory  held  by  the  minister  when  seeing 
the  emperor. 

® The  text  here  contains  two  peculiar  words,  whose  meaning 

cannot  be  made  out  in  this  connexion.  This  seems  to  be  a good  guess. 


112 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


set  up  the  four  bordering  countries,  and  neither  spirits  nor 
men  revolted  (any  more).  So  there  was  peace  in  the  world. 
This  was  the  reason  why  Yii  made  war  on  the  Miao. 

When  it  came  to  King  Chieh  of  Hsia,  Heaven  gave  severe 
order.  Sun  and  moon  did  not  appear  on  time.  Winter  and 
summer  came  irregularly.  The  five  grains  were  dried  up 
to  death.  Ghosts  called  in  the  country,  and  cranes  shrieked 
for  more  than  ten  nights.  Heaven  then  commissioned 
T’ang  in  the  Piao  Palace,  to  receive  the  great  trust  that  had 
been  given  to  Hsia,  as  the  conduct  of  Hsia  fell  into  great 
perversity.  Only  then  dared  T ang  to  lead  his  multitude 
and  enter  the  borders  of  Hsia.  And  he  let  the  deserters  of 
the  enemy  destroy  the  cities  of  Hsia.  Soon  after,  a god 
came  and  told  him ; ‘‘  The  conduct  of  Hsia  is  in  great  con- 
fusion. Go  and  punish  him.  I will  surely  let  you  destroy 
him,  as  I have  my  orders  from  Heaven.”  Heaven  ordered 
ChuYung^  to  send  down  fire  on  the  north-western  corner  of 
the  city  of  Hsia.  Thus  T'ang  led  the  men  of  Chieh  and 
conquered  Hsia.  He  then  gave  audience  to  the  feudal  lords 
at  Po.^  He  revealed  and  made  known  the  will  of  Heaven 
and  spread  it  in  the  four  directions,  and  none  of  the  feudal 
lords  in  the  empire  dared  to  show  disrespect.  This  was  the 
reason  why  T'ang  punished  Chieh. 

When  it  came  to  the  regime  of  King  Chow  of  Shang,  his 
conduct  was  not  acceptable  to  Heaven.  Sacrifices  were 
not  according  to  seasons.  Even  in  the  night  ^ . It 

rained  sand  for  ten  days  at  Po.  The  nine  caldrons  moved 

^ Chu  Yung  is  the  mythological  god  of  fire,  the  Chinese  Vulcan. 

2 Po  then  became  the  capital  of  Shang  Dynasty. 

® This  sentence  is  incomplete  in  the  text. 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAE  (III)  113 


jErom  their  place.  Witches  appeared  in  the  dark  and  ghosts 
sighed  at  night.  Some  women  turned  into  men.  Flesh 
came  down  from  Heaven  like  rain.  Thorny  brambles  covered 
up  the  national  highways.  Yet  the  king  became  even  more 
dissolute.  A red  bird  holding  a kuei  by  its  beak  alighted 
on  Mt.  Ghhd  proclaiming  : Heaven  decrees  King  Wen  of 
f Chou  to  punish  Yin  ^ and  possess  its  empire.”  T’ai  Tien  then 

j;  came  to  be  minister  to  (King  Wen).  The  charts  emerged 

out  of  the  Eiver  and  ch’eng-huang  ^ appeared  on  land.  There- 
I upon  King  Wu  ascended  the  throne.  Three  gods  spoke  to 

; him  in  a dream,  saying:  ''Now  that  we  have  submerged 

^ Chow  of  Yin  in  wine,  you  go  and  attack  him.  We  will  surely 

[ let  you  destroy  him.”  So,  King  Wu  set  out  and  attacked 

! Chow,  and  replaced  Shang  with  Chou.  Heaven  gave  King 

Wu  the  Yellow  Bird  Pennant.  Having  conquered  Yin 
he  continued  the  order  of  T’ang  and  assigned  the  worship 
of  the  ancestors  of  Chow  to  the  feudal  lords.  Connexions 
with  the  barbarians  of  the  four  borders  were  established, 

^ and  none  in  the  world  dared  to  show  disrespect.  This  was 

I the  reason  why  King  Wu  punished  Chow. 

I Speaking  about  the  work  of  these  three  sages,  it  is  not 

I to  be  called  attack  but  punishment. 

f The  warring  lords  would  again  gloss  over  (their  conduct) 

with  arguments  for  offensive  war  against  Motse,  saying : 

Do  you  condemn  attack  and  assault  as  unrighteous  and  not 

^ Mount  Chi  is  the  geographical  location  of  the  state  of  Chou  before  it 
overthrew  Shang  to  become  the  succeeding  dynasty  in  the  Chinese  Empire. 

^ Yin  is  the  changed  name  of  the  Dynasty  of  Shang. 

® Ch'eng-huang  ^ ^ is  described  as  an  animal  of  the  family  of  fox. 
Only,  it  has  two  horns  on  the  back.  This  animal,  if  it  ever  existed,  is  now 
^ extinct. 

I I 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


114 

beneficial  ? But,  in  ancient  times,  Hsiung  Li  assigned 
to  tlie  state  of  Cb’u  (about  1100  B.c.)  in  tbe  Mt;  of  Sui.  Yi 
K’uei  started  at  Yu  Gbii,  and  became  lord  of  Yiieb.  Unc^ 
T’ang  and  Lii  Shang  were  first  appointed  to  rule  over  tbe  states 
of  Cbin  (1107  b.c.)  and  of  Cb’i  (about  1120  B.c.)  respec- 
tively. All  these  started  with  a few  hundred  li  square  of 
land.  On  account  of  their  capture  of  other  states,  now  each 
of  them  has  a quarter  of  the  empire.  What  is  your  explana- 
tion for  this  V 

Motse  said:  You  have  not  examined  the  termino- 
logy of  my  teachings  and  you  do  not  understand  the 
underlying  principle.  In  ancient  times  the  emperor  com- 
missioned feudal  lords  numbering  more  than  ten  thousand. 
On  account  of  absorption  of  one  state  by  another,  all  of 
the  more  than  ten  thousand  states  have  disappeared  with 
only  the  four  remaining.  This  is  like  the  physician  who 
attends  more  than  ten  thousand  patients  but  cures  only 
four.  Such  an  one  is  not  to  be  said  to  be  a good 
physician. 

The  warring  lords  would  again  gloss  over  (their  conduct) 
with  arguments,  saying : (I  wage  war)  not  because  I am 
still  discontented  with  my  gold  and  jade,  my  children  and 
my  land.  I want  to  have  my  name  as  a righteous  ruler 
established  in  the  world  and  draw  the  other  feudal  lords  to 
me  with  my  virtue.” 

Motse  said : If  there  were  some  one  who  would 
establish  his  righteous  name  for  justice  in  the  world 
and  draw  the  feudal  lords  to  him  with  his  virtue, 
the  submission  of  the  whole  world  to  him  could  be  awaited 
while  standing.  For  the  world  has  long  been  in  turmoil 


CONDEMNATION  OF  OFFENSIVE  WAR  (III)  115 


and  war,  and  it  is  weary  like  the  boy  at  playing  horse.^  If 
only  there  were  some  one  who  would  first  benefit  the  other 
feudal  lords  in  mutual  good  faith ! When  some  large  state 
acts  unrighteously,  he  would  join  in  the  sorrow  ; when  some 
large  state  attacks  some  smaller  one  he  would  join  in  the 
rescue  ; when  the  outer  and  the  inner  walls  of  the  city  of  the 
small  state  are  in  ruin  he  would  demand  their  repair  ; when 
cloth  and  grains  are  exhausted  he  would  supply  them ; when 
money  and  silk  are  insuiBSicient  he  would  share  his  own — to 
befriend  the  large  state  in  this  way,  the  large  state  will  be 
pleased,  to  befriend  the  small  state  in  this  way,  the  small 
state  will  be  pleased.  With  the  others  tired  out  and  one’s 
self  at  ease,  one’s  armour  and  weapon  ^ would  be  stronger. 
When  with  kindness  and  mercy  we  help  the  people  in  their 
need,  the  people  will  be  drawn  over.  When  good  government 
is  substituted  for  aggressive  war,  the  country  will  be  benefited 
many  fold.  When  the  expenses  of  the  army  is  limited  and 
the  evils  of  the  feudal  lords  removed,  then  we  shall  enjoy 
prosperity.  Let  the  control  (of  the  army)  be  judicious  and 
the  cause  be  righteous.  Be  lenient  to  the  people  and  place 
confidence  in  the  army — with  this  to  meet  the  forces  of  the 
feudal  lords,  there  can  be  no  equal  in  the  world.  And  the 
benefits  to  the  world  will  be  innumerable.  This  is  what 
will  benefit  the  world,  yet  the  rulers  do  not  understand  making 
use  of  it : such  may  be  said  to  be  ignorance  of  the  great  thing 
in  the  world. 

^ Meaning  to  tire  one’s  self  out  for  no  benej&t.  Infra^  p.  216. 

^ Armour  and  weapon  here  figuratively  stand  for  resources  of  defence 
and  offence.  . 


116 


THE  WOBKS  OF  MOTSE 

Therefore  Motse  said : Now  if  the  rulers  and  the  gentlemen 
of  the  world  sincerely  desire  to  procure  benefits  and  avert 
calamities  for  the  world-if  they  desire  to  do  righteousness 
and  be  superior  men,  if  they  desire  to  strike  tbe  way  of  the 
sage-kings  on  the  one  hand  and  bless  the  people  on  the  other 
■—if  so,  the  doctrine  of  Condemnation  of  Ofiensive  War 

should  not  be  left  unheeded. 


BOOK  VI 


CHAPTER  XX 
Economy  of  Expenditures  (I) 

When  a sage  rales  a state  the  benefits  of  the  state  will 
be  increased  twice.  When  he  governs  the  empire,  those 
of  the  empire  will  be  doubled.  This  increase  is  not  by 
appropriating  land  from  without.  But  by  cutting  out  the 
useless  expenditures  it  is  accomplished.  In  issuing  an  order, 
taldng  up  an  enterprise,  or  employing  the  people  and 
expending  wealth,  the  sage  never  does  an3d3hing  without  some 
useful  purpose.  Therefore  wealth  is  not  wasted  and  people’s 
resources  are  not  exhausted,  and  many  are  the  blessings 
procured. 

In  making  clothing,  what  is  the  purpose  ? It  is  to  keep 
out  the  cold  in  winter  and  heat  in  summer.  The  good  of 
clothing  is  measured  in  terms  of  the  amount  of  warmth  it 
adds  in  winter  and  coolness  in  summer : what  is  merely 
decorative  and  does  not  contribute  to  these  is  to  be  let  alone. 

In  building  palaces  and  houses,  what  is  the  purpose  ? 
It  is  to  keep  out  the  wind  and  the  cold  in  winter  and  heat  and 
rain  in  summer,  and  to  fortify  against  thieves : what  is 
merely  decorative  and  contributes  nothing  to  these  should 
be  let  alone. 

In  forging  armour  and  shields  and  the  five  weapons,^ 
what  is  the  purpose  ? It  is  to  prepare  against  invasions 
and  revolts,  bandits  and  thieves.  When  these  happen,  with 

1 The  five  weapons  consist  of  sword,  spear,  etc.  About  the  specific 
members  making  np  the  five  weapons,  commentators  disagree.  But  the 
names  of  these  are  not  translatable  anyhow. 


118 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


armour,  shields,  and  the  five  weapons  one  will  succeed,  without 
them  one  cannot  succeed.  Therefore  the  sages  forged  armour, 
shields,  and  the  five  weapons.  And  their  good  is  measured 
in  terms  of  lightness,  sharpness  and  unbreakahility  : what 
is  merely  decorative  and  contributes  nothing  to  these  should 
be  let  alone. 

In  building  boats  and  vehicles,  what  is  the  purpose  ? 
A vehicle  is  to  go  on  land  and  a boat  is  to  sail  rivers  and 
valleys  in  order  to  transport  the  wealth  in  the  four  quarters. 
The  good  of  boats  and  vehicles  is  measured  in  terms  of  the 
amount  of  facility  and  convenience  they  afford:  what  is 
merely  decorative  and  contributes  nothing  to  these  should 
be  let  alone. 

Now,  in  making  all  these  things  none  is  done  without 
its  use  in  view.  Therefore  wealth  is  not  wasted  and  people’s 
resources  are  not  exhausted,  and  many  are  the  blessings 
procured. 

Besides,  (the  sages)  again  gave  up  all  such  hobbies  as 
collecting  pearls  and  jade,  and  pet  birds,  and  animals  such 
as  dogs  and  horses,  in  order  to  replenish  clothing,  houses, 
armour,  shields,  and  the  five  weapons,  and  boats  and  vehicles. 
And  these  were  multiplied  several  times.  But  to  increase 
these  is  not  difficult.  What,  then,  is  difficult  to  increase  ? 
To  increase  the  population  is  difficult. 

In  ancient  times,  the  sage-kings  said  : ''  No  man  of  twenty 
should  dare  to  be  without  a family ; no  girl  of  fifteen  should 
dare  to  be  without  a master.”  Such  were  the  laws  of  the 
sage-kings.  Now  that  the  sage-kings  have  passed  away, 
the  people  have  become  loose.  Those  who  like  to  have  a 
family  early  sometimes  marry  at  twenty.  Those  who  like 


ECONOMY  OF  EXPENDITURES  (I)  119 


to  liave  a family  late  sometimes  marry  at  forty.  Wlien  tlie 
late  marriages  are  made  up  by  the  early  ones,  (tbe  average)  is 
still  later  than  the  legal  requirements  of  the  sage-kings  by  ten 
years.  Supposing  births  are  given  to  children  on  an  average 
of  one  in  three  years,  then  two  or  three  children  should  have 
been  born  (by  the  time  men  now  marry).  This  is  not  just 
to  urge  men  to  establish  families  early  in  order  to  increase  the 
population.  But  also  ^ . ... 

Those  who  govern  the  empire  to-day  diminish  the  people 
in  more  ways  than  one  : Employing  the  people  they  exhaust 
them,  levying  taxes  they  make  them  heavy.  People  fall  into 
poverty  and  innumerable  persons  die  of  hunger  and  cold. 
Moreover  the  rulers  make  war  and  attack  some  neighbouring 
states.  It  may  last  a whole  year,  or,  at  the  shortest,  several 
months.  Thus  man  and  woman  cannot  see  each  other  for 
a long  time.  Is  not  this  a way  to  diminish  the  people? 
Living  in  danger,  eating  and  drinking  irregularly  many  become 
sick  and  die.  Hiding  in  ambush,^  setting  fire,  besieging  a 
city,  and  battling  in  the  open  fields,  innumerable  men  die. 
Are  not  ways  of  diminishing  the  people  getting  numerous 
with  the  government  of  the  rulers  of  to-day  ? They  did  not 
exist  when  the  sage-kings  administered  the  government. 
(In  the  government  by  the  sagacious),  many  ways  of  increasing 
the  population  will  arise. 

Therefore  Motse  said : To  cut  out  useless  expenditures 
is  the  way  of  the  sage-kings  and  a great  blessing  to  the 
world. 

^ Text  here  incomplete. 

2 Text  here  not  clear.  The  rendition  given  above  seems  to  be  a good 
conjecture. 


CHAPTER  XXI 
Ecoj^omy  of  Expenditures  (II) 

Motse  said  : The  ancient  illustrious  kings  and  sages  ruled 
over  the  empire  and  headed  the  feudal  lords  because  they 
loved  the  people  loyally  and  blessed  them  with  many  benefits. 
Loyalty  calls  out  confidence.  And,  when  blessing  is  shown 
in  addition,  the  people  were  not  wearied  during  their  whole 
life  and  did  not  feel  tired  until  their  death.  That  the  ancient 
illustrious  kings  and  sages  could  rule  over  the  empire  and 
head  the  feudal  lords  is  just  because  of  this. 

And  the  ancient  sage-kings  authorized  the  code  of  laws 
of  economy,  saying : All  you  artisans  and  workers, 

carpenters  and  tanners,  potters  and  smiths,  do  what  you  can 
do.  Stop  when  the  needs  of  the  people  are  satisfied.’'  What 
causes  extra  expense  but  adds  no  benefit  to  the  people  the 
sage-kings  would  not  undertake. 

The  ancient  sage-kings  authorized  the  code  of  laws  regarding 
food  and  drink,  saying : Stop  when  hunger  is  satiated, 
breathing  becomes  strong,  limbs  are  strengthened  and  ears 
and  eyes  become  sharp.  There  is  no  need  of  combining 
the  five  tastes  ^ extremely  well  or  harmonizing  the  different 
sweet  odours.  And  efforts  should  not  be  made  to  procure 
rare  delicacies  from  far  countries.”  How  do  we  know  such 
were  the  laws  ? In  ancient  times,  when  Yao  was  governing 
the  empire  he  consolidated  Chiao  Tse  ^ on  the  south,  reached 
Yu  Tu  on  the  north,  expanded  from  where  the  sun  rises  to 

^ The  five  tastes  refer  to  Bitter,  Hot,  Soui',  Sweet,  and  Salty. 

^ Chiao-Tse  is  the  ancient  name  for  what  is  now  called  West  Indo- 
China. 


ECONOMY  OE  EXPENDITUEES  (II)  121 


where  the  sim  sets  on  the  east  and  west,  and  none  was 
unsubmissive  or  disrespectful.  Yet,  even  when  he  was  served 
with  what  he  much  liked,  he  did  not  take  a double  cereal 
or  both  soup  and  meat.  He  ate  out  of  an  earthen  liu  Jg 
and  dranlc  out  of  an  earthen  hsing  and  took  wine  out 
of  a spoon.  With  the  ceremonies  of  bowing  and  stretching 
and  courtesies  and  decorum  the  sage-king  had  nothing  to  do. 

The  ancient  sage-kings  authorized  the  code  of  laws  regarding 
clothing,  saying : ''  Be  satisfied  with  clothes  of  blue  or  grey 
silk  in  winter  which  are  light  and  warm,  and  with  clothes 
of  flax-linen  in  summer  which  are  light  and  cool.’’  What 
causes  extra  expenditure  but  does  not  add  benefits  to  the 
people  the  sage-kings  would  not  allow. 

Because  the  ferocious  and  cunning  animals  were  destroying 
men  and  injuring  the  people,  the  ancient  sage-kings  taught 
the  people  the  use  of  weapons,  saying : Carry  a two-edged 
sword  which  penetrates  when  it  pierces  and  severs  when  it 
cuts.  When  struck  with  the  flat  side  it  does  not  break, 
this  is  the  utility  of  a sword.  To  be  light  and  strong  and 
afford  convenience  of  action,  such  is  the  utility  of  an  armour.” 

A vehicle  is  used  to  carry  weight  and  to  travel  great 
distances.  It  should  be  safe  to  ride  and  easy  to  pull ; safe 
to  ride  so  as  not  to  hurt  the  rider,  easy  to  pull  so  as  to  reach 
the  destination  speedily.  This  is  the  utility  of  the  vehicle. 
Because  the  wide  rivers  and  broad  valleys  were  once  not  cross- 
able  the  sage-kings  ordered  boats  and  oars  to  be  made. 
And  these  were  made  just  so  that  they  could  cross  the  rivers. 
Even  when  the  High  Duke  or  a feudal  lord  arrived,  the  boat 
and  the  oars  were  not  changed  and  the  ferryman  put  on  no 
decorations.  Such  is  the  utility  of  the  boat. 


122 


THE  WQEKS  OF  MOTSE 


The  ancient  sage-kings  anthorked  the  code  of  laws  limiting 
funeral  expenditure,  saying : ''  Of  shrouds  there  shall  be 
three  pieces  in  order  to  be  enough  to  hold  the  rotting  flesh. 
The  coffin  shall  be  three  inches  thick,  to  be  sufficient  to 
hold  the  rotting  bones.  The  pit  shall  be  dug  not  deep  enough 
to  reach  water,  but  just  so  deep  that  the  gases  will  not  escape. 
When  the  dead  is  buried  the  living  shall  not  mourn  too 
long." 

In  those  ancient  days,  at  the  beginning  of  the  race,  when 
there  were  no  palaces  or  houses,  people  lived  in  caves  dug 
at  the  side  of  hills  and  mounds.  The  sage-kings  felt  quite 
concerned,  thinking  that  the  caves  might  keep  off  the  wind 
and  cold  in  winter,  but  that  in  summer  it  would  be  wet  below 
and  steaming  above  which  might  hurt  the  health  of  the 
people.  So  palaces  and  houses  were  built  and  found  useful. 
Now,  what  is  the  standard  in  building  palaces  and  houses  ? 
Motse  said:  Just  so  that  on  the  side  it  can  keep  off  the 
wind  and  the  cold,  on  top  it  can  keep  off  the  snow,  frost, 
rain,  and  dew,  within  it  is  clean  enough  for  sacrificial 
purposes,  and  that  the  partition  in  the  palace  is  high  enough 
to  separate  the  men  from  the  women.  What  causes  extra 
expenditure  but  does  not  add  any  benefit,  to  the  people, 
the  sage-kings  will  not  undertake. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

Simplicity  m Funeral  (III) 

Mots0  said:  The  magnanimous  ruler  takes  care  of  the 
empire,  in  the  same  way  as  a filial  son  takes  care  of  his  parents. 
But  how  does  the  filial  son  take  care  of  his  parents?  If 
the  parents  are  poor  he  would  enrich  them ; if  the  parents 
have  few  people  (descendants)  he  would  increase  them ; if 
the  members  (of  the  family)  are  in  confusion  he  would  put 
them  in  order.  Of  course,  in  doing  this  he  might  find  his 
energy  insufiS.cient,  his  means  limited,  or  his  knowledge 
inadequate.  But  he  dare  not  allow  any  energy,  learning, 
or  means  unused  to  serve  his  parents.  Such  are  the  three 
interests  of  the  filial  son  in  taking  care  of  his  parents.  And 
the  same  is  true  of  the  magnanimous  ruler  in  taking  care  of 
the  empire : if  the  empire  is  poor  he  would  enrich  it ; if 
the  people  are  few  he  would  increase  them ; if  the  multitude 
are  in  confusion  he  would  put  them  in  order.  Of  course  in 
doing  these  he  might  find  his  energy  insufficient,  means 
limited,  or  knowledge  inadequate,  but  he  dare  not  allow 
any  energy,  learning,  or  means  unused  to  serve  the  world. 
And  such  are  the  three  interests  of  the  magnanimous  ruler 
in  taking  care  of  the  empire. 

When  the  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties  had  passed 
away,  and  the  world  had  become  ignorant  of  their  principles, 
some  of  the  gentlemen  in  later  generations  regarded  elaborate 
funeral  and  extended  mourning  as  magnanimous,  and 
righteous,  and  the  duty  of  a filial  son ; while  others  held  them 
to  be  not  magnanimous,  not  righteous,  and  not  the  duty  of  the 


124 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


filial  son.  These  two  groups  condemn  each  other  in  words 
and  contradict  each  other  in  deed,  and  yet  both  claim  to  be 
followers  of  the  way  of  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu. 
But  since  they  are  disagreed  in  word  and  opposed  in  deed, 
people  doubt  the  assertions  of  both.  Now  that  the  assertions 
of  both  are  doubted,  it  will  be  well  to  turn  to  the  government 
of  the  country  and  the  people  and  see  how  elaborate  funeral 
and  extended  mourning  affect  the  three  interests.  In  my 
opinion,  if,  in  adopting  the  doctrine  and  practising  the 
principle,  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  mourning  could 
enrich  the  poor,  increase  the  few,  remove  danger,  and  regulate 
disorder,  it  would  be  magnanimous,  righteous,  and  the  duty 
of  a filial  son.  Those  who  are  to  give  counsel  could  not  but 
encourage  it.  And  the  magnanimous  (ruler)  would  seek 
to  have  it  flourish  in  the  empire  and  establish  it  so  as  to 
have  the  people  praise  it  and  never  disregard  it  in  their 
whole  life.  (On  the  other  hand,)  if,  in  adopting  the 
doctrine  and  practising  the  principle,  elaborate  funeral 
and  extended  mourning  really  cannot  enrich  the  poor, 
increase  the  few,  remove  danger,  and  regulate  disorder,  it 
will  not  be  magnanimous,  righteous,  and  the  duty  of  the 
filial  son.  Those  who  are  to  give  counsel  cannot  but 
discourage  it.  And  the  magnanimous  will  seek  to  have 
it  abolished  in  the  empire  and  abandon  it  so  as  to  have  the 
people  condemn  it,  never  to  practise  it  in  their  whole  life. 
It  has  never  happened,  from  ancient  times  to  the  present  day, 
that  benefits  are  procured,  calamities  averted  for  the  world, 
and  disorder  among  the  people  of  the  country  is  regulated 
by  elaborate  funerals  and  extended  mourning. 

How  do  we  know  ? 


125 


SIMPLICITY  IN  PUlffiRAL  (III) 

For  even  at  the  present  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  are  still 
doubtfnl  whether  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  mourning 
are  right  and  beneficiaL 

Motse  said  : I have  examined  the  sayings  of  those  who 
uphold  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  mourning.  If  they 
should  be  taken  seriously  in  the  country,  it  would  mean  ^ : 
when  a lord  dies,  there  would  be  several  inner  and  outer 
coffins.  He  would  be  buried  deep.  There  would  be  many 
shrouds.  Embroidery  would  be  elaborate.  The  grave  mound 
would  be  massive.  So,  then,  the  death  of  a common  man 
would  exhaust  the  wealth  of  a family.  And  the  death  of 
a feudal  lord  would  empty  the  state  treasury  before  his 
body  would  be  surrounded  with  gold,  jade,  and  pearls,  and 
the  grave  filled  with  carts  and  horses  and  bundles  of  silk. 
Further,  there  should  be  plenty  of  canopies  and  hangings, 
tings, ^ drums,  tables,  pots,  and  ice  receptacles,  spears,  swords 
feather  banners,  and  hides  all  to  be  carried  along  and  buried. 
Not  till  then  are  the  requirements  considered  fulfilled.  And, 
regarding  those  who  were  to  die  to  accompany  their  lord, 
for  the  emperor  or  a feudal  lord  there  should  be  from  several 
hundred  to  several  tens,  and  for  a mimster  or  secretary 
there  should  be  from  several  tens  to  several. 

What  are  the  rules  to  be  observed  by  the  mourner  ? He 
must  weep  without  restraint  and  sound  as  if  he  is  choking. 
Sackcloth  is  worn  on  the  breast  and  hat  of  flax  on  the  head. 
His  tears  and  snivel  are  not  to  be  wiped  away.  The  mourner 
is  to  live  in  a mourning  hut,  sleep  on  a coarse  mat  of  straw, 

^ The  following  caricature  is  based  on  the  Books  of  Ceremonial  Records  : 
Chou  Li  ^ i^,  Yi  Li  |g,  and  Li  Chi  |f  |g. 

2 Ting  ^ is  a sacrificial  vessel  with  three  legs. 


126 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


and  lay  Ms  head  on  a lump  of  earth.  Then^  he  would  be 
obliged  to  abstain  from  food  in  order  to  look  hungry^  and  to 
wear  little  in  order  to  look  cold.  The  face  and  eyes  are  to 
look  sunken  and  as  if  in  fear,  and  the  complexion  is  to  appear 
dark.  Ears  and  eyes  are  to  become  dull,  and  hands  and  feet 
to  become  weak  and  unusable.  And,  also,  if  the  mourner 
is  a high  official,  he  has  to  be  supported  to  rise,  and  lean 
on  a cane  to  walk.  And  all  this  is  to  last  three  years. 

Adopting  such  a doctrine  and  practising  such  a principle  : 
rulers  cannot  come  to  court  early  ^ (and  retire  late ; the 
officials  cannot  attend  to  the)  five  offices  and  six  posts  ^ 
and  encourage  farming  and  forestry  and  fill  the  granaries  ; 
the  farmers  cannot  start  out  early  and  come  in  late  to  cultivate 
the  land  and  plant  trees ; the  artisans  cannot  build  boats 
and  vehicles  and  make  vessels  and  utensils  ; and  the  women 
cannot  rise  early  and  retire  late  to  weave  and  spin.  So, 
then,  in  elaborate  funerals  much  wealth  is  buried,  and  in 
extended  mourning  abstention  from  work  is  prolonged. 
Wealth  ahcady  produced  is  carried  away  into  the  grave. 
Child-bearing  is  postponed.  To  seek  wealth  in  this  way 
is  like  seeking  a harvest  by  prohibiting  farming.  The  way 
to  wealth  then  is  not  here  found. 

Now  that  the  practice  of  elaborate  funerals  and  extended 
mourning  has  failed  to  enrich  the  country  perhaps  it  can 
yet  increase  the  population  ? Again  it  is  powerless.  For 
if  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  mourning  are  adopted  as 

1 The  text  here  shows  a break  and  is  incomplete.  The  parenthesis  inserted 
seems  to  supply  the  loss, 

^ The  five  offices  and  six  posts  differ  with  different  dynasties.  At  any  rate, 
they  represent  the  several  departments  of  the  government. 


SIMPLICITY  IN  PXMIEAL  (III)  127 

the  rule,  then  upon  the  death  of  the  emperor  there  will  be 
three  years'  mourning,  upon  the  death  of  a parent  there  will 
be  three  years’  mourning,  upon  the  death  of  the  wife  or 
the  eldest  son  there  will  be  three  years’  mourning.  There 
will  be  three  years’  mourning  for  all  five  (relations).  Besides, 
there  will  be  one  year  for  uncles,  brothers,  and  the  other 
sons  ; and  five  months  for  the  near  relatives,  and  also  several 
months  for  aunts,  sisters,  nephews,  and  uncles  on  the  mother’s 
side.  Pui‘the.r,  there  are  set  rules  to  emaciate  one’s  health  : 
the  face  and  eyes  are  to  look  sunken  and  as  if  in  fear,  and  the 
complexion  is  to  appear  dark.  Ears  and  eyes  are  to  become 
dull,  and  hands  and  feet  are  to  become  weak  and  unusable. 
And,  also,  if  the  mourner  is  a high  official,  he  has  to 
be  supported  to  rise  and  lean  on  a cane  to  walk.  And  this 
is  to  last  three  years  if  such  a doctrine  is  adopted  and  such 
a principle  is  practised.  Being  so  hungry  and  weak,  the 
people  cannot  stand  the  cold  in  winter  and  the  heat  in  summer. 
And  countless  numbers  will  become  sick  and  die.  Sexual 
relations  between  husband  and  wife  are  prevented.  To  seek 
to  increase  the  population  by  this  way  is  like  seeking  longevity 
by  thrusting  one’s  self  upon  a sword.  The  way  to  dense 
population  is  not  here  found. 

Now  that  it  has  failed  to  increase  the  population,  perhaps 
it  can  yet  regulate  jurisdiction  ? Again  it  is  powerless. 
For,  adopting  elaborate  funerals  and  extended  mourning 
as  a principle  in  government,  the  state  will  become  poor, 
the  people  few,  and  the  jurisdiction  disorderly.  Adopting 
such  a doctrine  and  practising  such  a principle  superiors 
cannot  give  attention  to  admdnistration  and  subordinates 
cannot  attend  to  their  work.  When  the  superiors  are  unable 
to  give  their  attention  to  administration  there  will  be  disorder. 


128 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


When  the  subordinates  are  unable  to  attend  to  tbeir  work, 
the  supply  of  food  and  clotking  will  be  insufficient.  ’Wbeii 
there  is  insufficiency,  the  undutiful  younger  brother  will 
ask  his  older  brother  for  help,  and  when  he  does  not  receive 
it  he  will  hate  the  elder  brother.  The  unfilial  son  will  turn 
to  his  father  for  help  and  wffien  he  does  not  receive  it  he 
will  spurn  his  father.  And  the  disloyal  minister  will  turn 
for  help  to  his  lord  and  when  he  does  not  receive  it. he  will 
mock  his  lord.  And  vicious  and  immoral  people  will  commit 
evil  and  immorality  beyond  control  when  they  are  without 
clothing  abroad  and  without  food  at  home.  So,  bandits 
and  thieves  will  be  numerous  but  law-abiding  people  few. 
Now,  to  seek  order  by  multiplying  the  bandits  and  thieves 
and  diminishing  the  law-abiding  people  is  like  demanding 
of  a person  not  to  present  his  back  to  you  after  making  him 
turn  around  three  times.  The  way  to  order  is  not  here 
found. 

Now  that  it  has  failed  to  regulate  jurisdiction  and  govern- 
ment, perhaps  it  can  yet  prevent  the  large  states  from 
attacking  the  small  states  ? Again  it  is  powerless.  For 
since  the  ancient  sage-kings  have  passed  away  and  the  world 
has  become  ignorant  of  their  principles,  the  feudal  lords 
resort  to  attack  by  force.  On  the  south  there  are  the  kings 
of  Oh’u  and  Yiieh,  and  on  the  north  there  are  the  lords  of 
Ch’i  and  Chin.  All  of  these  show  favours  and  encouragement 
to  their  warriors  and  soldiers,  making  it  their  business  in  the 
world  to  attack  and  absorb  (others).  Some  small  states, 
however,  they  do  not  attack,  and  this  because  these  small 
states  are  well  stored  with  supplies,  their  inner  and  outer 
city  walls  are  in  repair,  and  in  them  the  superior  and  the 


SIMPLICITY  IN  FUNERAL  (III)  129 

subordinates  are  barmonious.  Therefore  the  large  states 
would  not  want  to  attack  them.  Those  which  are  not  well 
stored  with  supplies,  whose  inner  and  outer  city  walls  are 
not  in  repair,  and  in  which  the  superior  and  the  subordinates 
are  not  harmonious,  the  large  states  would  want  to  attack. 
Adopting  elaborate  funerals  and  extended  mourning  in  govern- 
ment, the  state  will  become  poor,  the  people  few,  and  jurisdic- 
tion  disorderly.  Since  the  state  is  poor,  no  surplus  goods 
can  be  stored.  Since  its  numbers  are  few,  there  will  be  few 
workmen  to  keep  the  city  walls  and  moats  in  repair.  Since 
it  is  disorderly,  a state  will  not  be  victorious  in  attack  or 
strong  in  defence. 

Now  that  it  has  failed  in  preventing  the  large  states  from 
attacking  the  small  states,  perhaps  it  can  yet  procure  blessing 
from  God  and  the  spirits.  Again  it  is  powerless.  For, 
adopting  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  mourning  as  a 
principle  in  government,  the  state  will  become  poor,  the 
people  few,  and  the  jurisdiction  disorderly.  When  the  state 
is  poor  the  cakes  and  wine  will  be  unclean.  When  the 
people  are  few  the  worshippers  of  God  and  the  spirits  will 
be  reduced  in  number.  And  when  jurisdiction  is  in  disorder 
the  sacrifice  will  not  be  made  according  to  season.  Moreover, 
the  worship  of  God  and  the  spirits  is  now  even  prohibited. 
When  the  government  is  run  like  this,  God  and  the  spirits 
would  deliberate  from  on  high,  saying : Which  is  better, 
to  have  these  people  exist  or  not  to  have  them  exist  ? It 
really  makes  no  difierence  whether  they  exist  or  not.''  There- 
fore God  and  spirits  will  send  judgment  upon  them  and 
visit  them  with  calamities  and  punish  and  desert  them.  Is 
not  this  quite  in  place  ? 

■■■■  K 


130 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


Therefore  the  ancient  sage-kings^  authorized  the  code 
of  laws  regarding  the  burial  of  the  dead  thus : The  coiBSn 
shall  be  three  inches  thick,  sulBiicient  to  hold  the  body.  As 
to  shrouds  there  shall  be  three  pieces  adequate  to  cover  the 
corpse.  It  shall  not  be  buried  so  deep  as  to  reach  water  and 
neither  so  shallow  as  to  allow  the  odour  to  ascend.  Three 
feet  in  size  shall  be  big  enough  for  the  mound.  There  shall 
be  no  extended  mourning  after  burial,  but  speedy  return 
to  work  and  pursuit  in  what  one  can  do  to  procure  mutual 
benefit.  Such  are  the  laws  of  the  sage-kings. 

Those  who  uphold  elaborate  funerals  and  extended 
mourning  say : Although  elaborate  fimerals  and  extended 
mourning  cannot  enrich  the  poor,  increase  the  few,  remove 
danger  and  regulate  disorder,  yet  they  were  a principle  of 
the  sage-kings.’’ 

Motse  replied ; Not  at  all.  Anciently,  Yao  went  north 
to  instruct  the  eight  tribes  of  Ti.^  He  died  on  the  way  and 
was  buried  in  the  shade  ® of  Mt.  Ch’iung.  Of  shrouds  there 
were  three  pieces.  The  coffin  was  of  soft  wood,  and  sealed 
with  flax  linen.  Weeping  started  only  after  burial.  There 
was  no  mound,  only  the  pit  was  filled  up.  After  burial, 
oxen  and  horses  plodded  over  it.  Shun  went  west  to  instruct 
the  seven  tribes  of  Jung.^  He  died  on  the  way  and  was 
buried  in  the  market  place  of  Nan  Chi.  Of  shrouds  there 
were  three  pieces.  The  coffin  was  of  soft  wood  and  sealed 
with  flax  linen.  After  burial  the  people  in  the  market  place 
walked  over  it.  Yu  went  east  to  instruct  the  nine  tribes 
of  Yi.2  He  died  on  the  way  and  was  buried  at  Mt.  Kuei  Chi. 

^ Here  Motse  mainly  refers  to  Yii,  who  of  all  the  sage-kings  advocates 
the  simplest  ceremonies. 

® Names  of  different  aboriginal  tribes  surrounding  China  then. 

® Meaning  south  of  Mount  Ch’iung. 


SIMPLICITY  IN  PUNERAL  (III) 


131 


Of  clothing  there  were  three  pieces.  The  coffin  was  of 
t"nng  wood  ^ and  sealed  with  flax  linen.  It  did  not  crush  when 
bound,  and  it  did  not  sink  in  when  pressed.  The  pit  was  not 
deep  enough  to  strike  water  and  not  so  shallow  as  to  allow 
the  odour  to  ascend.  When  the  coffin  had  been  buried,  the 
remaining  earth  was  gathered  on  it,  and  the  mound  was  three 
feet  high  and  no  more.  So,  to  judge  according  to  these  three 
sage-kings,  elaborate  funerals  and  extended  mourning  were 
really  not  the  way  of  the  sage-kings.  These  three  sage-kings 
held  the  rank  of  Sons  of  Heaven  and  possessed  the  whole 
empire,  yet  they  authorized  their  burial  in  this  way ; was 
it  because  of  any  fear  of  lack  of  means  ? 

The  way  in  which  the  present  rulers  are  buried  is  quite 
different  from  this.  There  are  the  outer  and  the  inner 
coffins,  and  then  the  three  layers  of  hide  and  embroidered 
covers.  When  the  stones  and  jade  are  all  collected,  there 
are  yet  to  be  completed  the  spears,  swords,  tings,  pots  and 
ice  receptacles,  and  ten  thousand  of  decorated  reins  and 
yokes,  and  the  carriages,  horses,  and  the  chorus  girls.  Then, 
there  must  be  built  the  tunnel  to  reach  under  the  tomb  which 
is  as  high  as  a hill.  This  interferes  with  people's  work  and 
wastes  people's  wealth  to  such  a great  extent.  How  indeed 
is  this  to  be  avoided  ? 

So  Motse  said : I have  already  said  that  if,  in  adopting 
the  doctrine  and  practising  the  principle,  elaborate  funeral 
and  extended  mourning  really  could  enrich  the  poor,  increase 
the  few,  remove  danger  and  regulate  disorder,  they  would 
be  magnanimous,  righteous,  and  the  duty  of  the  filial  son. 

1 T'ung  is  a large  tree  belonging  to  the  Eupborbiacoe  or  Elmococca 
sinensis* 


132 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 

Those  who  give  counsel  could  not  but  encourage  them. 
(On  the  other  hand,)  if,  in  adopting  the  doctrine  and  practising 
the  principle,  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  m 
really  cannot  enrich  the  poor,  increase  the  few,  remove  danger 
and  regulate  disorder,  they  are  not  magnanimous,  righteous, 
and  the  duty  of  the  filial  son.  Those  who  are  to  give  counsel 
cannot  but  discourage  it.  Now,  (we  have  seen)  that  to  seek 
to  enrich  a country  thereby  brings  about  poverty ; to  seek 
to  increase  the  people  thereby  results  in  a decrease  ; and  to 
seek  to  regulate  government  thereby  begets  disorder.  To 
seek  to  prevent  the  large  states  from  attacking  the  small 
ones  by  this  way  is  impossible  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the 
other,  to  seek  to  procure  blessing  from  God  and  the  spirits 
through  it  only  brings  calamity.  When  we  look  up  and 
examine  the  ways  of  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu, 
we  find  it  is  diametrically  opposed  to  (these).  But  when 
we  look  down  and  examine  the  regimes  of  Chieh,  Chow, 
Yu,  and  Li,  we  find  it  agrees  with  these  like  two  parts  of 
a tally.  So,  judging  from  these,  elaborate  funeral  and 
extended  mourning  are  not  the  way  of  the  sage^kings. 

Those  who  uphold  elaborate  funeral  and  extended  mourning 
are  saying : ‘ ‘ If  the  elaborate  funerals  and  extended  mourning 
were  not  the  way  of  the  sage-kings,  why  then  do  the  gentlemen 
of  the  Middle  Eingdom  ^ practise  them  continually  and  follow 
them  without  discrimination  I ’’ 

Motse  said:  This  is  because  habit  affords  convenience 
and  custom  carries  approval.  Anciently,  east  of  the  state 

^ Middle  Kingdom  ” ^ was  used  by  the  Chinese  themselves  to  refer 

to  the  Chinese  Empire  in  contrast  to  the  surrounding  barbarian  tribes,  and 
semi-barbarian  states  like  Ch*u  and  Yiieh. 


SIMPLICITY  IN  lUNlRAL  (III) 


133 


of  Yiieli  tliore  was  the  tribe  of  K^ai  Shn.  Among  them  the 
first-born  son  was  dismembered  and  devoured  after  birth 
and  this  was  said  to  be  propitious  for  his  younger  brothers. 
When  the  father  died  the  mother  was  carried  away 
and  abandoned,  and  the  reason  was  that  one  should  not  live 
with  the  wife  of  a ghost.  By  the  officials  this  was  regarded 
as  a government  regulation  and  by  the  people  it  was  accepted 
as  a commonplace . They  practised  it  continually  and  followed 
it  without  discrimination.  Was  it  then  the  good  and  the  right 
way  ? No,  this  is  really  because  habit  affords  convenience 
and  custom  carries  approval.  South  of  Ch’u  there  was  a 
cannibal  tribe.^  Upon  the  death  of  the  parents  the  flesh 
was  scraped  off  and  thrown  away,  while  the  bones  were  buried. 
And  by  following  this  custom  one  became  a filial  son.  West 
of  the  state  of  Ch’in  there  was  the  tribe  of  Yi  Ch’ii.  Upon 
their  death  the  parents  were  burned  on  a bonfire  and  amidst 
the  smoke,  and  this  was  said  to  be  ascension  to  the  golden 
clouds.  In  this  way  one  became  a filial  son.  The  officials 
embodied  it  in  the  government  regulations  and  the  people 
regarded  it  as  a commonplace.  They  practised  it  continually 
and  followed  it  without  discrinoination.  Is  it  then  the  good 
and  the  right  way  ? No,  this  is  really  because  habit  affords 
convenience  and  custom  carries  approval. 

Now,  the  practice  of  these  three  tribes  is  too  heartless 
and  that  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  is  too 
elaborate.  This  being  too  elaborate  and  that  being  to 
heartless,  then  there  should  be  rules  for  funerals  and  burials. 
Even  regarding  clothing  and  food,  which  are  the  necessities 

^ There  is  a more  detailed  description  of  the  practice  of  this  tribe  on 
p.  246f. 


134 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


of  life,  there  are  rules.  How  then  can  there  be  none  regarding 
funerals  and  burials,  which  are  the  necessities  of  death  ? 
Outlining  the  rules  for  funerals  and  burials,  Motse  said ; 
The  coffin  shall  be  three  inches  thick,  just  suffi.cient  to  hold 
the  rotting  bones.  Of  shrouds  there  shall  be  three  pieces 
just  to  be  enough  to  hold  the  rotting  flesh.  The  pit  shall 
be  dug  not  so  deep  as  to  strike  water,  and  not  so  shallow 
as  to  allow  the  odour  to  ascend.  The  mound  shall  be  just 
high  enough  to  be  identified  (by  the  mourners).  There  may 
be  weeping  on  the  way  to  and  from  the  burial.  But  upon 
returning  they  shall  engage  in  earning  the  means  of  livelihood. 
Sacrifices  shall  not  be  neglected  in  order  to  express  one’s 
filial  piety  to  parents.  Thus  the  rules  of  Motse  neglect  the 
necessities  of  neither  the  dead  nor  the  living. 

Hence,  Motse  said : If  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  really 
want  to  practise  righteousness  and  magnanimity,  and  to 
seek  to  be  superior  men,  desiring  to  attain  the  way  of  the 
sage-kings  on  the  one  hand  and  to  procure  blessings  for  the 
people  on  the  other,  they  cannot  afford  to  neglect  the  principle 
of  Simplicity  in  Funeral  in  government. 


BOOK  VII 

CHAPTEEXXVI 
Will  of  Heaton  (I) 

Mots©  said:  TL.©  gentlemon  of  the  world  all  understand 
only  trifles  but  not  things  of  importance.  How  do  we  know  ? 
We  know  this  from  one’s  conduct  in  the  family.  If  on©  should 
offend  the  patriarch  of  the  family,  there  are  still  the  homes 
of  the  neighbours  in  which  to  seek  shelter.  Yet  parents, 
brothers,  and  friends  all  keep  on  reminding  one  to  be  obedient 
and  careful.  For,  how  can  on©  offend  the  patriarch  and  stay 
in  the  family  ? Not  only  is  this  true  about  conduct  in  the 
family,  but  also  in  the  state.  If  one  should  offend  the  lord 
of  the  state  there  are  stiU  the  neighbouring  states  whither 
he  may  flee.  Yet  parents,  brothers,  and  friends  all  keep 
on  reminding  one  to  be  obedient  and  careful.  For,  how  can 
one  offend  the  lord  of  the  state  and  stay  in  it  ? From  these 
there  are  yet  shelters  to  flee  to,  yet  there  are  such  constant 
counsels.  Should  there  not  be  more  counsels  in  a case  from 
which  there  is  nowhere  to  flee  ? As  the  saying  goes : 
‘‘  Sinning  in  broad  daylight,  whither  can  one  flee  ? ” Eeally 
there  is  nowhere  to  flee.  For,  Heaven  clearly  discerns  it 
even  if  it  be  in  the  woods,  valleys,  or  solitary  caves  where 
there  is  no  man.  But,  contrary  to  our  expectation,  regarding 
Heaven,  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  do  not  understand 
mutually  to  give  counsel.  This  is  how  we  know  the  gentlemen 
in  the  world  understand  only  trifles  and  not  things  of 
importance. 


136 


THE  WOKKS  OF  MOTSE 


ow,  what  does  Heaven  desire  and  what  does  it  abominate  ? 
desires  righteousness  and  abominates  unrighteousness. 
, in  leading  the  people  in  the  world  to  engage  in 
doing  righteousness  I should  be  doing  what  Heaven  desires. 
When  I do  what  Heaven  desires,  Heaven  will  also  do  what 
desire.  Now,  what  do  I desire  and  what  do  I abominate  ? 
I desire  blessings  and  emoluments,  and  abominate  calamities 
and  misfortunes.  When  I do  not  do  what  Heaven  desires, 
will  Heaven  do  what  I desire.  Then  I should  be 
the  people  into  calamities  and  misfortunes.  But  how 
do  we  know  Heaven  desires  righteousness  and  abominates 
unrighteousness  ? For,  with  righteousness  the  world  lives 
and  without  it  the  world  dies ; with  it  the  world  becomes 
and  without  it  the  world  becomes  poor  ; with  it  the  world 
becomes  orderly  and  without  it  the  world  becomes  chaotic. 

Heaven  likes  to  have  the  world  live  and  dislikes  to  have 
it  die,^  likes  to  have  it  rich  and  dislikes  to  have  it  poor,  and 
likes  to  have  it  orderly  and  dislikes  to  have  it  disorderly. 

we  know  Heaven  desires  righteousness  and 
abominates  unrighteousness. 

Moreover,  righteousness  is  the  standard.  A standard  is 
to  be  given  by  the  subordinates  to  the  superior  but  by 
the  superior  to  the  subordinates.  Therefore,  while  the 
common  people  should  spare  no  pains  at  work  they  may  not 
the  standard  at  will.  There  are  the  scholars  to  give 
them  the  standard.  While  the  scholars  should  spare  no  pains 
at  work,  they  may  not  make  the  standard  at  will.  There  are 
the  ministers  and  secretaries  to  give  them  the  standard. 


^ This  idea  may  be  taken  as  the  Chinese  and  humanistic  counterpart  of 
the  Western  classical  assumption  that  being  is  better  than  non-being. 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (I) 


137 


While  the  ministers  and  secretaries  should  spare  no  pains 
at  work,  they  may  not  make  the  standard  at  will  There 
are  the  high  duke  and  feudal  lords  to  give  them  the  standard. 
While  the  high  duke  and  the  feudal  lords  should  spare  no 
pains  at  work,  they  may  not  make  the  standard  at  will  There 
is  the  emperor  to  give  them  the  standard.  The  emperor 
may  not  make  the  standard  at  will  (either).  There  is  Heaven 
to  give  him  the  standard.  That  the  emperor  gives  the 
standard  to  the  high  duke,  to  the  feudal  lords,  to  the  scholars, 
and  to  the  common  people,  the  gentlemen  in  the  world  clearly 
understand.  But  that  Heaven  gives  the  standard  to  the 
emperor,  the  people  do  not  know  well.  Therefore  the  ancient 
sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu, 
desiring  to  make  it  clear  to  the  people  that  Heaven  gives 
the  standard  to  the  emperor,  fed  oxen  and  sheep  with  grass, 
and  pigs  and  dogs  with  grain,  and  cleanly  prepared  the  cakes 
and  wine  to  do  sacrifice  to  God  on  High  and  the  spirits, 
and  invoked  Heaven’s  blessing.  But  I have  not  yet  heard 
of  Heaven  invoking  the  emperor  for  blessing.  So  I know 
Heaven  gives  the  standard  to  the  emperor. 

The  emperor  is  the  most  honourable  of  the  world  and  the 
richest  of  the  world.  So,  the  honoured  and  the  rich  cannot 
but  obey  the  will  of  Heaven.  He  who  obeys  the  will  of 
Heaven,  loving  universally  and  benefiting  others,  will  obtain 
rewards.  He  who  opposes  the  will  of  Heaven,  by  being  partial 
and  unfriendly  and  harming  others,  will  incur  punishment. 
Now,  who  were  those  that  obeyed  the  will  of  Heaven  and 
obtained  rewards,  and  who  were  those  that  opposed  the 
will  of  Heaven  and  incurred  punishment  ? 

Motse  said : The  ancient  sage-Mngs  of  the  Three  Dynasties, 


138 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wn,  were  those  that  obeyed  the  will 
of  Heayen  and  obtained  reward.  And  the  wicked  kings 
of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Chieh,  Chow,  Yn,  and  Li,  were  those 
that  opposed  the  will  of  Heawen  and  incurred  punishment. 
How  did  Yti,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu  obtain  their  reward  ? 

Motse  said : In  the  highest  sphere  they  revered  Heaven, 
in  the  middle  sphere  they  worshipped  the  spirits,  and  in  the 
lower  sphere  they  loved  the  people.  Thereupon  the  will  of 
Heaven  proclaimed : All  those  whom  I love  these  love  also, 
and  all  those  whom  I benefit  these  benefit  also.  Their  love 
to  men  is  all-embracing  and  their  benefit  to  men  is  most 
substantial.”  And  so,  they  were  raised  to  the  honour  of 
Sons  of  Heaven  and  enriched  with  the  heritage  of  the  empire. 
They  were  succeeded  by  descendants  for  ten  thousand^ 
generations  to  continue  the  spread  of  their  righteousness 
all  over  the  world.  And  people  praise  them  unto  this  day, 
calling  them  righteous  sage-kings. 

How  did  Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li  incur  their  punishment  ? 

Motse  said  : In  the  highest  sphere  they  blasphemed  against 
Heaven,  in  the  middle  sphere  they  blasphemed  against 
the  spirits,  and  in  the  sphere  below  they  oppressed  the  people. 
Thereupon  the  will  of  Heaven  proclaimed : Prom  those 
whom  I love  these  turn  away  and  hate,  and  those  whom 
I want  to  benefit  they  oppress.  Their  hate  of  men  is  without 
limit  and  their  oppression  of  men  the  most  severe.”  And, 
so,  they  were  not  permitted  to  finish  out  their  lives, ^ or  to 
survive  a single  generation.  And  people  condemn  them 
unto  this  day,  calling  them  wicked  kings. 

^ A common  Chinese  figure  for  many. 

® Meaning  to  die  unnaturally. 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (I) 


How  do  we  know  Heaven  loves  the  people  ? Because  it 
teaches  them  all  How  do  we  know  it  teaches  them  all  ? 
Because  it  claims  them  all.  How  do  we  know  it  claims  them 
all  ? Because  it  accepts  sacrifices  from  them  all.  How  do 
we  know  it  accepts  sacrifices  from  all  ? Because  within  the 
four  seas  all  who  live  on  grains^  feed  oxen  and  sheep  with 
grass,  and  dogs  and  pigs  with  grains,  and  prepare  clean  cakes 
and  wine  to  do  sacrifice  to  God  on  High  and  the  spirits. 
Claiming  all  the  people,  why  will  Heaven  not  love  them  ? 
Moreover,  as  I have  said,  for  the  murder  of  one  innocent 
individual  there  will  be  one  calamity.  VTio  is  it  that  murders 
the  iimocent  ? It  is  man.  Who  is  it  that  sends  down  the 
calamity  ? It  is  Heaven.  If  Heaven  should  be  thought  of 
as  not  loving  the  people,  why  should  it  send  down  calamities 
for  the  murder  of  man  by  man  ? So,  I know  Heaven  loves 
the  people. 

To  obey  the  will  of  Heaven  is  to  accept  righteousness 
as  the  standard.  To  oppose  the  will  of  Heaven  is  to  accept 
force  as  the  standard.  Now  what  will  the  standard  of 
righteousness  do  ? 

Motse  said : He  who  rules  a large  state  does  not  attack 
small  states : he  who  rules  a large  house  does  not  molest 
small  houses.  The  strong  does  not  plunder  the  weak.  The 
honoured  does  not  disdain  the  humble.  The  clever  does  not 
deceive  the  stupid.  This  is  beneficial  to  Heaven  above, 
beneficial  to  the  spirits  in  the  middle  sphere,  and  beneficial 
to  the  people  below.  Being  beneficial  to  these  three  it  is 
beneficial  to  all.  So  the  most  excellent  name  is  attributed 
to  such  a man  and  he  is  called  sage-king. 

^ Mark  of  civilization  of  tke  agricultural  stage. 


140 


THE  WOBKS  OF  MOTSE 


The  standard  of  force  is  difierent  from  this.  It  is  con- 
tradictory to  this  in  word  and  opposed  to  this  in  deed  like 
galloping  with  back  to  back.  Leading  a large  state,  he  whose 
standard  is  force  attacks  smaU  states  ; leading  a large  house 
he  molests  smaU  houses.  The  strong  plunders  the  weak. 
The  honoured  disdains  the  humble.  The  clever  deceives 
the  stupid.  This  is  not  beneficial  to  Heaven  above,  or  to 
the  spirits  in  the  middle  sphere,  or  to  the  people  below. 
Not  being  beneficial  to  these  three,  it  is  beneficial  to  none. 
So,  the  most  evil  name  in  the  world  is  attributed  to  him 

and  he  is  called  the  wicked  king. 

Motse  said : The  wih  of  Heaven  to  me  is  like  the  compasses 
to  the  wheelwright  and  the  square  to  the  carpenter.  The 
wheelwright  and  the  carpenter  measure  all  the  square  and 
circular  objects  with  their  square  and  compasses  and  accept 
those  that  fit  as  correct  and  reject  those  that  do  not  fit  as 
incorrect.  The  writings  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  of 
the  present  day  cannot  be  all  loaded  (in  a cart),  and  their 
doctrines  cannot  be  exhaustively  enumerated.  They  en- 
deavour to  convince  the  feudal  lords  on  the  one  hand  and 
the  scholars  on  the  other.  But  from  magnanimity  and 
righteousness  they  are  far  ofi.  How  do  we  know  ? Because 
I have  the  most  competent  standard  in  the  world  to  measure 
them  with. 


CHAPTER  XXVII 
Will  of  Heaven  (II) 

Motse  said : Those  gentlemen  in  the  world  who  want  to 
practise  magnanimity  and  righteousness  cannot  but  examine 
the  origin  of  righteousness.  Since  we  want  to  examine  the 
origin  of  righteousness,  then  where  does  it  originate  ? 

Motse  said : Righteousness  does  not  originate  with  the 
stupid  and  humble  but  with  the  honourable  and  wise.  How 
do  we  know  it  does  not  originate  with  the  dull  and  humble  but 
with  the  honourable  and  wise  ? For,  righteousness  is  the 
standard.  How  do  we  know  righteousness  is  the  standard  ? 
For,  with  righteousness  the  world  will  be  orderly  and  without 
it  the  world  will  be  disorderly.  Therefore  righteousness 
is  known  to  be  the  standard.  As  the  dull  and  the  humble 
cannot  make  the  standard,  and  only  the  wise  and  honourable 
can,  therefore  I know  righteousness  does  not  come  from  the 
stupid  and  humble  but  from  the  honourable  and  wise. 

Now  who  is  honourable  and  who  is  wise?  Heaven  is 
honourable,  Heaven  is  wise.  So,  then,  righteousness  must 
originate  with  Heaven.  People  in  the  world  would  say ; 

That  the  emperor  is  more  honourable  than  the  feudal  lords 
and  that  the  feudal  lords  are  more  honourable  than  the 
ministers,  we  clearly  see.  But  that  Heaven  is  more  honour- 
able and  wise  than  the  emperor,  we  do  not  see.” 

Motse  said : I know  Heaven  is  more  honourable  and  wise 
than  the  emperor  for  a reason : When  the  emperor  practises 
virtue  Heaven  rewards,  when  the  emperor  does  evil  Heaven 
punishes.  Wken  there  are  disease  and  calamities  the  emperor 


142 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


will  purify  and  bathe  himself  and  prepare  clean  cakes  and 
wine  to  do  sacrifice  and  libation  to  Heaven  and  the  spirits. 
Heaven  then  removes  them.  But  I have  not  yet  heard  of 
Heaven  invoking  the  emperor  for  blessing.  So  I know 
Heaven  is  more  honourable  and  wise  than  the  emperor. 
And,  this  is  not  all.  We  also  learn  of  this  from  the  book 
of  the  ancient  kings  which  instructs  us  the  vast  and  ineffable 
Tao  of  Heaven.  It  says : ‘‘  Brilliant  and  perspicacious 

Heaven  on  High,  who  enlightens  and  watches  over  the  earth 
below  ! ^ This  shows  Heaven  is  more  honourable  and  wise 
than  the  emperor.  But  is  there  yet  any  one  more  honourable 
and  wise  than  Heaven  ? Heaven  is  really  the  most  honourable 
and  wise.  Therefore,  righteousness  surely  comes  from 
Heaven.  And  hence  Motse  said : If  the  gentlemen  of  the 
world  really  desire  to  follow  the  way  and  benefit  the  people, 
they  must  not  disobey  the  will  of  Heaven,  the  origin  of 
magnanimity  and  righteousness. 

Now  that  we  must  obey  the  will  of  Heaven,  what  does 
the  will  of  Heaven  desire  and  what  does  it  abominate  ? 
Motse  said  : The  will  of  Heaven  abominates  the  large  state 
which  attacks  small  states,  the  large  house  which  molests 
small  houses,  the  strong  who  plunder  the  weak,  the  clever 
who  deceive  the  stupid,  and  ^the  honoured  who  disdain  the 
humble — ^these  are  what  the  will  of  Heaven  abominates. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  desires  people  having  energy  to  work 
for  each  other,  those  knowing  the  way  to  teach  each  other, 

These  are  the  two  opening  lines  of  the  ode  “ Hsiao  Ming  ” in  Shih 
Ching.  Legge,  vol.  iv,  p.  363,  renders  it  thus : — 

**  0 bright  and  high  Heaven, 

Who  enlightenest  and  rulest  this  lower  world ! ' 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (II) 


143 


and  those  possessing  wealth  to  share  with  each  other.  And 
it  desires  the  superior  diligently  to  attend  to  government 
and  the  subordinates  diligently  to  attend  to  their  work. 
When  the  superior  attends  to  the  government  diligently, 
the  country  will  be  orderly.  When  the  subordinates  attend 
to  work  diligently,  wealth  will  be  abundant.  When  the 
country  is  orderly  and  wealth  is  abundant,  within  the  state 
there  will  be  wherewith  to  prepare  clean  cakes  and  wine  to 
sacrifice  to  God  and  the  spirits,  and  in  relation  with  outside 
countries  there  will  be  wherewith  to  furnish  rings,  stones, 
pearls,  and  jades  by  which  to  befriend  surrounding  neighbours. 
With  the  grudges  of  the  feudal  lords  inactive  and  fighting 
on  the  borders  suspended,  and  the  people  within  provided 
with  food  and  rest,  the  emperor  and  the  ministers  and  the 
superiors  and  subordinates  will  be  gracious  and  loyal  respec- 
tively, and  father  and  son  and  elder  and  younger  brothers 
will  be  affectionate  and  filial  respectively.  Therefore  when 
the  principle  of  obeying  the  will  of  Heaven  is  understood 
and  widely  practised  in  the  world,  then  justice  and  govern- 
ment will  be  orderly,  the  multitudes  will  be  harmonious, 
the  country  will  be  wealthy,  the  supplies  will  be  plenteous, 
and  the  people  will  be  warmly  clothed  and  sufficiently  fed, 
peaceful  and  without  worry.  Therefore  Motse  said:  If 
the  gentlemen  of  the  world  really  desire  to  follow  the  way 
and  benefit  the  people  they  must  carefully  investigate  the 
principle  that  the  will  of  Heaven  is  the  origin  of  magnanimity 
and  righteousness. 

The  rule  of  Heaven  over  the  world  is  not  unlike  the  rule 
of  the  feudal  lord  over  the  state.  In  ruling  the  state  does 
^he  feudal  lord  desire  his  ministers  and  people  to  work  for 


144 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTS! 


mutual  disadvantage  ? If  leading  a large  state  one  attacks 
small  states,  if  leading  a large  tonse  one  molests  small  houses 
— ^if  by  doing  this  one  seeks  reward  and  commendation  (from 
the  feudal  lord)  he  cannot  obtain  it.  On  the  contrary, 
punishment  will  visit  him.  Now,  the  rule  of  Heaven  over 
the  world  is  not  unlike  this.  If  leading  a large  state  one 
attacks  small  states,  if  leading  a large  house  one  molests 
small  houses — if  by  doing  this  one  seeks  reward  and  com- 
mendation (from  Heaven)  he  cannot  obtain  it.  On  the 
contrary,  punishment  will  visit  him.  When  (man)  does  not 
do  what  Heaven  desires,  but  does  what  Heaven  abominates, 
Heaven  will  also  not  do  what  man  desires  but  do  what  he 
abominates.  What  man  abominates  are  disease  and 
calamities.  Therefore  not  to  do  what  Heaven  desires  but 
do  what  it  abominates  is  to  lead  the  multitudes  in  the  world 
to  calamity.  Therefore  the  ancient  sage-kings  studied 
what  Heaven  and  the  spirits  would  bless  and  avoided  what 
they  would  curse  in  order  to  procure  benefits  for  the  world 
and  avoid  calamities.  Thereupon,  Heaven  made  heat  and 
cold  temperate,  the  four  seasons  harmonious,  the  Yin  and 
Yang  and  rain  and  dew  timely.  The  five  grains  are  enabled 
to  ripen  and  the  six  animals  to  mature.  And  disease, 
pestilence,  and  famine  did  not  happen.  Therefore  Motse 
said : If  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  really  desire  to  follow 
the  Tao  and  benefit  the  people  they  must  be  mindful  of 
the  principle  that  the  will  of  Heaven  is  the  origin  of 
magnanimity  and  righteousness. 

In  the  world  those  who  lack  benevolence  are  unfortunate. 
If  a son  does  not  serve  his  father,  a younger  brother  does 
not  serve  his  elder  brother,  or  a subordinate  does  not  serve 


WILL  OF  HIAVBN  (II) 


his  superior^  then  all  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  will  call 
him  xmfortnnate.  Now  Heayen  loves  the  whole  world 
universally.  Everything  is  prepared  ^ for  the  good  of  man. 
Even  the  tip  of  a hair  is  the  work  of  Heaven.  Substantial 
may  be  said  of  the  benefits  that  are  enjoyed  by  man.  Yet 
there  is  no  service  in  return.  And  they  do  not  even  know 
this  to  be  nmnagnanimons  and  unfortunate.  This  is  why 
I say  the  gentlemen  understand  only  trifles  and  not  things 
of  importance. 

Moreover  I know  Heaven  loves  men  dearly  not  without 
reason.  Heaven  ordered  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  to 
enlighten  and  guide  them.  Heaven  ordained  the  four 
seasons,  Spring,  Autumn,  Winter,  and  Summer,  to  regulate 
them.  Heaven  sent  down  snow,  frost,  rain,  and  dew  to  grow 
the  five  grains  and  flax  and  silk  ^ that  so  the  people  could  use 
and  enjoy  them.  Heaven  established  the  hills  and  rivers, 
ravines  and  valleys,  and  arranged  many  things  to  minister 
to  man’s  good  or  bring  him  evil.  He  appointed  the  dukes 
and  lords  to  reward  the  virtuous  and  punish  the  wicked, 
and  to  gather  metal  and  wood,  birds  and  beasts,  and  to  engage 
in  cultivating  the  five  grains  and  flax  and  silk  to  provide  for 
the  people’s  food  and  clothing.  This  has  been  taking  place 
from  antiquity  to  the  present.  Suppose  there  is  a man  who 
is  deeply  fond  of  his  son  and  has  used  his  energy  to  the  limit 
to  work  for  his  benefit.  But  when  the  son  grows  up  he  returns 
no  love  to  the  father.  The  gentlemen  of  the  world  will  all 
call  him  unmagnanimous  and  miserable.  Now  Heaven 

^ The  term  here  used  in  the  text  is  **  chiao  sui  ’ ’ Its  exact  meaning 

is  not  ascertainable. 

2 Meaning  mulberry. 


146 


THE  WORKS  OE  MOTS! 


loves  the  whole  world  universaUy.  Everything  is  prepared  ^ 
for  the  good  of  man.  The  work  of  Heaven  extends  to  even 
the  smallest  things  that  are  enjoyed  by  man.  Such  benefits 
may  indeed  be  said  to  be  substantial,  yet  there  is  no  service 
in  return.  And  they  do  not  even  know  this  to  be  unmag- 
nanimons.  This  is  why  I say  the  gentlemen  of  the  world 
understand  only  trifles  but  not  things  of  importance.^ 

Yet  this  does  not  exhaust  my  reasons  whereby  I know 
Heaven  loves  man  dearly.  It  is  said  the  murder  of  an  innocent 
individual  will  caU  down  a calamity.  Who  is  the  innocent  ? 
Man  is.  From  whom  is  the  visitation?  From  Heaven. 
If  Heaven  does  not  love  the  people  dearly,  why  should  Heaven 
send  down  a visitation  upon  the  man  who  murders  the 
innocent  ? Thus  I know  Heaven  loves  man  dearly. 

This  is  stiU  not  all  by  which  I know  Heaven  loves  man 
dearly.  There  are  those  who  love  the  people  and  benefit 
the  people  and  obey  the  will  of  Heaven  and  obtain  reward 
from  Heaven.  There  are  also  those  who  hate  the  people 
and  oppress  the  people  and  oppose  the  will  of  Heaven  and 
incur  punishment  from  Heaven.  Who  are  those  that  love 

^ Supra,  p 145,  note  1.  , . , « 

a Compare  this  them©  of  Motse’s  with  the  foUowmg  from  Seneca,^  On 
Benefits,  iv,  6 : **  We  can  he  thankful  to  a friend  for  a few  acres,  or  a little 
money ; and  yet  for  the  freedom  and  command  of  the  whole  earth,  and  for 
the  great  benefits  of  our  being,  as  life,  health,  and  reason,  we  look  upon 
ourselves  as  under  no  obligation.  If  a man  bestows  upon  us  a house  that  is 
delicately  beautified  with  painting,  statues,  gildings,  and  marbles,  we 
make  a mighty  business  of  it,  and  yet  it  lies  at  the  mercy  of  a pufi  of  wind, 
the  snuff  of  a candle,  and  a hundred  other  accidents  to  lay  it  in  the  dust. 
And  is  it  nothing  now  to  sleep  under  the  canopy  of  heaven,  where  we  have 
the  globe  of  the  earth  as  our  place  of  repose,  and  the  glories  of  the  heavens 
for  our  spectacle  ? 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (II) 


the  people  and  benefit  the  people,  obey  the  will  of  Heaven 
and  obtain  reward  from  Heaven  ? They  are  the  ancient 
sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang, 
Wen,  and  Wu.  What  did  Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen, 
and  Wu  do  ? They  engaged  themselves  in  universality 
and  not  partiality  (in  love).  Loving  universally,  they  did 
not  attack  the  small  states  with  their  large  states,  they  did 
not  molest  the  small  houses  with  their  large  houses.  The 
strong  did  not  plunder  the  weak,  the  many  did  not 
oppress  the  few,  the  clever  did  not  deceive  the  stupid,  the 
honoured  did  not  disdain  the  humble.  Such  a regime  was 
agreeable  to  Heaven  above,  to  the  spirits  in  the  middle  sphere, 
and  to  the  people  below.  Being  helpful  to  these  three, 
it  was  helpful  to  all.  And  this  was  Heavenly  virtue.  The 
most  excellent  names  in  the  world  were  gathered  and 
attributed  to  them,  and  they  were  called  magnanimous, 
righteous,  beloved  of  man  and  beneficial  to  the  people, 
obedient  to  the  will  of  Heaven  and  rewarded  of  Heaven. 

Besides  this,  it  is  also  recorded  on  the  bamboos  and  silk, 
cut  in  metals  and  stones,  and  engraved  on  the  dishes  and 
cups  to  be  handed  down  to  posterity.  What  is  this  for  ? 
It  is  to  mark  out  those  who  loved  the  people  and  benefited 
them,  obeyed  the  will  of  Heaven  and  obtained  reward  from 
Heaven.  Thus  the  ode  of  Huang  Yi  says  : God  said  to  King 
Wen,  ‘ I cherish  your  intelligent  virtue.  It  was  not  proclaimed 
with  much  noise  or  gesture.  It  was  not  modified  after  the 
possession  of  the  empire.  How  instructively  and  naturally 
submissive  to  the  scheme  of  Heaven  ! " ^ Because  he  was 


^ This  is  the  seventh  stanza  of  the  ode  of  “ Huang  Yi " in  8hih  Ching. 
It  is  a narration  of  the  rise  of  the  dynasty  of  Chou  and  the  deeds  of 


148 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


obedient  to  God’s  scheme.  He  rewarded  Mm  with  Yin  ^ and 
honoured  him  to  be  emperor  and  enriched  him  with  the 
empire.  And  his  fame  is  not  forgotten  even  unto  this  day. 
Hence  we  are  enabled  to  know  who  are  those  that  loved 
the  people  and  benefited  them,  obeyed  the  will  of  Heaven 
and  obtained  reward  from  Heaven. 

Now,  who  are  those  that  hated  the  people  and  oppressed 
them,  opposed  the  will  of  Heaven  and  incurred  punishment 
from  Heaven  ? They  are  the  ancient  wicked  kings  of  the 
Three  Dynasties,  Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li.  What  did  they 
do  ? They  Tvere  selfish  and  ungenerous.  Being  selfish  they 
attacked  the  small  states  with  their  large  states,  they 
molested  the  small  houses  with  their  large  houses.  The 
strong  plundered  the  weak,  the  many  oppressed  the  few, 
the  clever  deceived  the  ignorant,  the  honoured  disdained  the 
humble.  Such  a regime  was  not  helpful  to  Heaven  above, 
to  the  spirits  in  the  middle  sphere,  or  to  the  people  below. 
Since  it  was  not  helpful  to  these  three  it  was  helpful  to  none. 
And  they  were  called  the  enemies  of  Heaven.  The 
most  evil  names  in  the  world  were  gathered  and  attributed 
to  them,  and  they  were  called  unmagnanimous,  unrighteous, 
haters  of  man  and  oppressors  of  the  people,  disobedient  to 
the  will  of  Heaven  and  punished  by  Heaven.  Besides  this, 

some  of  its  early  kings.  According  to  Legge,  vol.  iv,  p.  464,  the  stanza 
reads : “ God  said  to  King  Wan ; — 

‘ I am  pleased  with  your  intelligent  virtne, 

Not  loudly  proclaimed  nor  portrayed, 

Without  extravagance  or  changeableness, 

Without  consciousness  of  effort  on  your  part, 

In  accordance  with  the  pattern  of  God.'  " 

^ I.e.  God  gave  him  the  succession  to  the  dynasty  of  Yin, 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (II) 


149 


it  is  also  recorded  on.  the  bamboos  and  silk,  cut  in  the  metals 
and  stones,  and  engraved  on  the  plates  and  cups  to  be  handed 
down  to  posterity.  What  is  this  for  ? It  is  to  mark  out 
those  that  hated  the  people  and  oppressed  them,  opposed 
the  will  of  Heaven  and  incurred  punishment  from  Heaven. 
Thus  relates  the  Great  Declaration : ‘‘  Chow  went  beyond 
the  proper  limits  and  became  insolent.  He  would  not  worship 
God  and  pushed  away  the  ancestors  and  spirits  without 
oSering  them  sacrifices.  And  he  said : ' Fortune  is  with  me/ 
and  neglected  and  betrayed  his  duty.  Heaven  thereupon 
deserted  him  and  withdrew  its  protection.’’  ^ Heaven 
deserted  Chow  and  withdrew  its  support  because  Chow 
opposed  the  will  of  Heaven.  Hence  we  are  enabled  to  know 
who  are  those  that  hated  the  people  and  oppressed  them, 
opposed  the  will  of  Heaven  and  incurred  punishment  from 
Heaven. 

Therefore  the  will  of  Heaven  is  like  the  compasses  to  the 
wheelwright  and  the  square  to  the  carpenter.  The  wheel- 
wright tests  the  circularity  of  every  object  in  the  world 
with  his  compasses,  saying : ''  That  which  satisfies  my 

compasses  is  circular.  That  which  does  not  is  not  circular.” 
Therefore  whether  an  object  is  circular  or  not  is  all  known, 
because  the  standard  of  circularity  is  all  established.  The 
carpenter  also  tests  the  squareness  of  every  object  in  the 

^ The  text  we  now  have  of  the  “ Great  Declaration  in  Shu  Ching  is  quite 
different.  For  comparison  Legge  is  hero  quoted,  vol.  iii,  pp.  285-6 : “ But 
Show  has  no  repentent  heart.  He  abides  squatting  on  his  heels,  not  serving 
God  or  the  spirits  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  neglecting  also  the  temple  of  his 
ancestors,  and  not  sacrificing  in  it.  The  victims  and  the  vessels  of  millet 
ail  become  the  prey  of  wicked  robbers;  and  still  he  says,  ‘The  people  are 
mine  : The  decree  is  mine,"  never  trying  to  correct  his  contemptuous  mind.*’ 


160 


THE  WOEKS  Of  MOTSl 


world  witli  Hs  square,  saying : ''  Tliat  wMch  satisfies  my 
square  is  square  ; that  which  does  not  is  not  square.''  There- 
fore whether  any  object  is  square  or  not  is  all  Imown.  Why 
so  ? Because  the  standard  of  squareness  is  established. 
Similarly,  with  the  will  of  Heaven  Motse  will  measure  the 
jurisdiction  and  government  of  the  lords  in  the  empire  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  doctrines  and  teachings  of  the  multitudes 
in  the  empire  on  the  other.  If  some  conduct  is  observed  to 
be  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  Heaven,  it  is  called  good 
conduct ; if  it  is  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  Heaven  it  is  called 
bad  conduct.  If  a teaching  is  observed  to  be  in  accordance 
with  the  will  of  Heaven  it  is  called  good  teaching ; if  it  is 
in  opposition  to  the  will  of  Heaven  it  is  called  bad  teaching. 
And  if  a government  is  observed  to  be  in  accordance  with 
the  will  of  Heaven  it  is  called  good  government ; if  it  is  in 
opposition  to  the  will  of  Heaven  it  is  called  bad  government. 
With  this  as  the  model  and  with  this  as  the  standard,  whether 
the  lords  and  the  ministers  are  magnanimous  or  not  can  be 
measured  as  (easily  as)  to  distinguish  black  and  white. 
Therefore  Motse  said  : If  the  rulers  and  the  gentlemen  of  the 
world  really  desire  to  follow  the  way  and  benefit  the  people 
they  have  only  to  obey  the  will  of  Heaven,  the  origin  of 
magnanimity  and  righteousness.  Obedience  to  the  will  of 
Heaven  is  the  standard  of  righteousness. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 
Will  of  Heavek  (III) 

Motse  said:  What  is  the  reason  for  the  disorder  in  the 
world  ? It  is  because  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  all  under- 
stand trifles  but  not  things  of  importance.  How  do  we  know 
they  understand  trifles  but  not  things  of  importance  ? 
Because  they  do  not  understand  the  will  of  Heaven.  How 
do  we  know  they  do  not  understand  the  will  of  Heaven? 
By  observing  the  conduct  in  the  family.  If  a man  commits 
a misdemeanour  in  the  family  he  still  has  other  families 
in  which  to  seek  shelter.  Yet,  father  reminds  son,  the 
elder  brother  reminds  the  younger  brother,  saying : Be 
obedient,  be  careful  in  conduct  in  the  family.  If  one 
is  not  obedient  and  careful  in  conduct  in  the  family  how 
can  he  live  in  the  state  ? If  a man  commits  a mis- 
demeanour in  the  state  he  still  has  other  states  in  which  to 
seek  shelter.  Yet  father  reminds  son  and  the  elder  brother 
reminds  the  younger  brother,  saying : Be  obedient.  Be 
careful.  One  cannot  live  in  a state  and  be  disobedient 
and  careless.’'  Now  all  men  live  in  the  world  and  under 
Heaven.  When  a man  sins  against  Heaven  there  is  nowhere 
to  seek  shelter.  But  people  do  not  think  of  warning  each 
other.  Thus  I know  that  they  do  not  understand  things  of 
importance.  And  Motse  said:  Be  obedient.  Be  careful. 
Be  sure  to  do  what  Heaven  desires  and  avoid  what  Heaven 
abominates. 

Now,  what  does  Heaven  desire  and  what  does  Heaven 
abominate  ? Heaven  desires  righteousness  and  abominates 


152 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


imrigliteousness.  How  do  we  know  this  ? Because  rigliteoixs- 
ness  is  tlie  standard.  How  do  we  know  righteousness  is  the 
standard  ? Because  with  righteousness  the  world  will  be 
orderly  ; without  it  the  world  will  he  disorderly.  Soj  I know 
righteousness  is  the  standard.  Now  a standard  is  never  given 
by  the  subordinate  to  the  superior,  it  is  always  to  be  given  by 
the  superior  to  the  subordinate.  Hence  the  common  people 
may  not  make  the  standard  at  will.  There  are  the  scholars 
to  give  them  the  standard.  The  scholars  may  not  make  the 
standard  at  will.  There  are  the  ministers  to  give  them  the 
standard.  The  ministers  may  not  make  the  standard  at 
will.  There  are  the  feudal  lords  to  give  them  the  standard. 
The  feudal  lords  may  not  make  the  standard  at  will.  There 
is  the  high  duke  to  give  them  the  standard.  The  high  duke 
may  not  make  the  standard  at  will.  There  is  the  emperor 
to  give  him  the  standard.  The  emperor  may  not  make  the 
standard  at  will.  There  is  Heaven  to  give  him  the  standard. 
The  gentlemen  of  the  world  all  understand  that  the  emperor 
gives  the  standard  to  the  world  but  do  not  understand  that 
Heaven  gives  the  standard  to  the  emperor.  The  sages, 
explaining  this,  said : ‘‘  When  the  emperor  has  done  good, 
Heaven  rewards  him.  When  the  emperor  has  committed 
wrong,  Heaven  punishes  him.  When  the  emperor  is  unjust 
in  reward  and  punishment  and  not  judicious  in  hearing 
lawsuits,  Heaven  visits  him  with  disease  and  calamities, 
and  frost  and  dew  will  be  untimely,”  The  emperor  will 
then  have  to  feed  oxen  and  sheep  with  grass  and  dogs 
and  pigs  with  grains  and  prepare  clean  cakes  and  wine  to 
pray  and  invoke  Heaven  for  blessing.  I have  not  yet 
heard  of  Heaven  praying  and  invoking  the  emperor  for 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (III) 


153 


blessing.  So,  I can  say  Heaven  is  more  honourable  and  wise 
than  the  emperor.  Therefore  righteousness  does  not  come 
from  the  ignorant  and  humble  but  from  the  honourable  and 
wise.  Who  is  honourable  ? Heaven  is  honourable.  Who 
is  wise  ? Heaven  is  wise.  And,  so,  righteousness  assuredly 
comes  from  Heaven.  And  the  gentlemen  of  the  world 
who  desire  to  do  righteousness  therefore  must  obey  the  will 
of  Heaven. 

What  is  the  will  of  Heaven  that  is  to  be  obeyed  ? It 
is  to  love  all  the  people  in  the  world  universally.  How  do 
we  know  it  is  to  love  all  the  people  in  the  world  universally  ? 
Because  (Heaven)  accepts  sacrifices  from  all.  How  do  we 
know  Heaven  accepts  sacrifices  from  all?  Because  from 
antiquity  to  the  present  day  there  is  no  distant  or  isolated 
country  but  what  feeds  oxen  and  sheep,  dogs  and  pigs 
with  grass  and  grains,  and  prepare  clean  cakes  and  wine 
to  worship  God,  hills  and  rivers,  and  the  spirits.  So 
we  know  Heaven  accepts  sacrifices  from  all  Accepting 
sacrifice  from  all,  Heaven  must  love  them  all.  Take  the 
lords  of  Ch’u  and  Yiieh  for  instance.  The  lord  of  Ch'u 
accepts  offering  from  all  within  the  four  borders  of  Ch’u, 
therefore  he  loves  the  people  of  Ch'u.  And,  the  lord  of  Yiieh 
accepts  offering  from  all  within  the  four  borders  of  Yiieh, 
therefore  he  loves  the  people  of  Yiieh.  Now  Heaven  accepts 
offering  from  all  the  world  and  so  I know  Heaven  loves  all 
the  people  in  the  world. 

That  Heaven  loves  all  the  people  of  the  world  is  proved 
not  only  by  this.  In  all  the  countries  in  the  world  and  among 
all  the  people  who  live  on  grains,  the  murder  of  one  innocent 
individual  brings  down  one  calamity.  Now  who  is  it  that 


154 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

murders  the  ixmocent  ?.  It  is  man.  Who  is  it  that  sends 
down  the  calamity  ? It  is  Heaven.  If  Heaven  really  did 
not  love  the  people,  why.  does  Heaven  send  dowm  calamities 
for  the  murder  of  the  innocent  ? 

Furthermore,  Heaven- loves  the  people  dearly,  Heaven 
loves  the  people  inclusively.  And  this  can  be  known.  How 
do  we  know  Heaven-  loves  the  people  ? Because  of  the 
certain  reward  to  the  good  and  punishment  to  the  evil  from 
the  virtuous  (Heaven).  How  do  we  know  the  virtuous 
(Heaven)  certainly  rewards  the  good  and  punishes  the  evil  ? 
I know  this  from  the  (examples  of)  the  sage-kings  of  the 
Three  Dynasties.  Anciently,  the  sage-kings  of  the  Three 
Dynasties,  Yao,  Shun,  Yti,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  loved  the  world 
universally  and  proceeded  to  benefit  them.  They  converted 
the  desires  of  the  people  and  led  them  to  worship  God, 
hills  and  rivers,  and  the  spirits.  Heaven  was  pleased  because 
they  loved  what  it  loved  and  benefited  what  it  would  benefit, 
and  besto'wed  rewards  upon  them,  placing  them  on  the  throne, 
crowning  them  emperor,  upholding  them  as  the  standard, 
and  calling  them  sage-kings.  Here  we  have  the  proof  of 
reward  of  the  good. 

Anciently,  the  wicked  kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Ohieh, 
Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,  hated  all  the  world  and  proceeded  to 
oppress  them.  They  converted  the  desires  of  the  people 
and  led  them  to  blaspheme  against  God,  hills  and  rivers,  and 
the  spirits.  Heaven  was  offended  because  they  hated  those 
whom  Heaven  loved  and  oppressed  those  whom  Heaven 
would  benefit,  and  Heaven  decreed  punishments  upon  them, 
letting  fathers  and  sons  be  scattered,  their  empire  he  put  to  an 
end,  their  state  be  lost  to  them,  and  capital  punishment  fall 


WILL  OF  HEAWBN  (III) 


155 


upon  them.  Thereupon,  the  multitudes  in  the  world  con- 
demned them,  the  condemnation  lasting  all  through  the 
ten  thousand  generations,  the  people  calling  them 
wicked  kings.  Here  we  have  the  proof  of  punishment  of 
the  evil. 

Those  gentlemen  of  the  world  who  desire  to  do  righteous- 
ness have  only  to  obey  the  will  of  Heaven.  To  obey  the 
will  of  Heaven  is  to  be  universal  and  to  oppose  the  will  of 
Heaven  is  to  be  partial  (in  love).  According  to  the  doctrine 
of  universality  righteousness  is  the  standard;  in  the  doc- 
trine of  partiality  force  is  the  basis  of  government.  What 
is  it  like  to  have  righteousness  as  the  basis  of  government  ? 
The  great  will  not  attack  the  small,  the  strong  will  not  plunder 
the  weak,  the  many  will  not  oppress  the  few,  the  clever 
will  not  deceive  the  ignorant,  the  honoured  will  not  disdain 
the  humble,  the  rich  will  not  mock  the  poor,  and  the  young 
will  not  rob  the  old.  And  the  states  in  the  empire  will  not 
ruin  each  other  with  water,  fire,  poison,  and  weapons.  Such 
a regime  will  be  benefi.cial  to  Heaven  above,  to  the  spirits 
in  the  middle  sphere,  to  the  people  below.  Being  benefi.cial 
to  these  three  it  is  benefi.cial  to  all.  This  is  called  the  virtue 
of  Heaven;  whoever  practises  this  is  a sage,  magnanimous, 
gracious,  and  righteous,  loyal,  afiectionate,  and  filial,  and 
all  such  good  names  in  the  world  will  be  gathered  and 
atrributed  to  him.  Why  so  ? Because  such  conduct  is  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  Heaven. 

Now,  what  is  it  like  to  have  force  as  the  basis  of  govern- 
ment ? The  great  will  attack  the  small,  the  strong  will 
plunder  the  weak,  the  many  will  oppress  the  few,  the  clever 
will  impose  upon  the  ignorant,  the  honoured  will  disdain 


166 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


the  humble,  the  rich  will  mock  the  poor,  and  the  young  will 
rob  the  old.  And  the  states  in  the  empire  will  ruin  each  other 
with  water,  fire,  poison,  and  weapons.  Such  a regime  will 
not  be  helpful  to  Heaven  above,  to  the  spirits  in  the  middle 
sphere,  or  to  the  people  below.  Hot  being  helpful  to  these 
three,  it  is  not  helpful  to  any.  This  is  called  the  enemy  of 
Heaven.  He  who  practises  this  is  a bad  man,  not  magnani- 
mous, not  gracious,  and  unrighteous,  disloyal,  unaSectionate, 
and  unfilial,  and  all  such  evil  names  in  the  world  are  gathered 
and  attributed  to  him.  Why  so  ? Because  such  conduct 
is  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  Heaven. 

Hence  Motse  established  the  will  of  Heaven  as  his  standard, 
just  as  the  wheelwright  uses  his  compasses  and  the  carpenter 
uses  his  square  as  their  standards.  The  w^heelwright  with 
his  compasses  and  the  carpenter  with  his  square  can  judge 
the  circularity  and  the  squareness  of  objects.  Similarly, 
with  the  will  of  Heaven  as  the  standard,  Motse  can  tell 
that  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  are  far  from  righteousness. 

How  do  we  know  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  are  far  from 
righteousness  ? For,  the  lords  in  the  large  states  compete  in 
saying : ‘‘  Being  a big  state,  if  I do  not  attack  the  small 
states,  in  what  way  am  I big  ? Therefore  they  mustered 
their  warriors  and  soldiers,  and  arranged  their  boat  and 
chariot  forces  to  attack  some  innocent  state.  They  broke 
into  its  borders,  cut  down  its  fields,  felled  its  trees,  tore  down 
its  inner  and  outer  city  walls,  and  filled  up  its  moats  and 
ditches,  burned  its  ancestral  temples  and  seized  and  Idiled 
its  sacrificial  victims.  Of  the  people  the  strong  were  killed, 
the  weak  were  brought  back  in  chains  and  ropes.  The  men 
were  turned  into  servants  and  grooms  and  prisoners.  The 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (III) 


107 


women  were  made  to  be  waitresses  (to  pour  wine).  Yet,  the 
warring  lord  did  not  even  know  that  this  is  unmagnanimous 
and  nnrigliteous.  He  announced  to  the  neighbouring  lords : 

I have  attacked  a state,  defeated  an  army,  and  killed 
so  many  generals.^’  And  the  neighbouring  lords  did  not 
know  that  this  is  unmagnanimous  and  unrighteous  either, 
but  with  furs  and  silk  sent  envoys  to  ofier  congratulations. 
And  the  warring  lords  were  even  doubly  ignorant  of  its  being 
immagnanimous  and  unrighteous.  They  recorded  it  on  the 
bamboos  and  silk  and  kept  them  in  the  archives  so  that  the 
descendants  would  imitate  their  royal  ancestors,  saying: 

Why  not  let  us  open  up  the  archives  and  let  us  learn  of 
the  achievements  of  our  ancestors  ? ” Then  they  would 
surely  not  learn : Such  and  such  is  the  regime  of  Wu,” 
but  would  learn : I have  attacked  states,  reversed  armies, 
and  killed  so  many  of  their  generals.’’  Now  that  the  warring 
lords  do  not  understand  this  to  be  unmagnanimous  and 
unrighteous,  and  neighbouring  lords  do  not  understand 
this  to  be  unmagnanimous  and  unrighteous,  therefore  attacks 
and  assaults  go  on  generation  after  generation  without  end. 

What  do  I mean  when  I say  people  do  not  understand 
things  of  importance  but  understand  trifles  ? Supposing 
some  one  entered  the  orchard  and  garden  of  another  and  took 
the  other’s  peaches  and  prunes,  melon  and  ginger,  he  will 
be  punished  by  the  superior  when  caught  and  condemned 
by  the  public  when  heard  of.  Why  ? Because  he  did  not 
share  the  toil  hut  takes  the  fruit  and  appropriates  what  is 
not  his.  How  much  more  is  this  true  with  him  who  jumps 
over  another’s  fence  and  maltreats  the  children  of  the  other  ; 
of  hir)(>  who  digs  into  another’s  storehouse  and  carries  away 


158 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


the  other’s  gold,  jade,  silk,  and  cloth ; of  him  who  breaks 
into  another’s  fold  and  steals  the  other's  oxen  and  horses ; 
and  of  him  who  kills  an  innocent  person  ? In  the  govermnent 
of  the  lords  of  to-day  all— from  the  one  who  kills  an  innocent 
person  to  the  one  who  jumps  over  another’s  fence  and  maltreats 
the  other’s  children,  who  digs  into  another’s  warehouse 
and  carries  away  his  gold,  jade,  silk  and  cloth,  who  breaks 
into  another’s  fold  and  steals  his  oxen  and  horses,  and  who 
enters  another’s  orchard  and  garden  and  takes  Ms  peaches 
and  prunes,  melons  and  ginger — all  these  are  punished  quite 
the  same  as  they  would  be  even  in  the  government  of  Yao, 
Shun,  Yli,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu.  Now  the  lords  and  chiefs 
in  the  world  all  attack  and  absorb  others.  This  is  a thousand 
and  ten  thousand  times  worse  than  killing  one  innocent 
individual,  a thousand  and  ten  thousand  times  worse  than 
jumping  over  another’s  fence  and  maltreating  his  children 
or  digging  into  another’s  storehouse  and  carrying  away 
his  gold,  jade,  silk,  and  cloth,  a thousand  and  ten  thousand 
times  worse  than  breaking  into  another’s  fold  and  stealing 
his  oxen  and  horses,  or  entering  another’s  orchard  and  garden 
and  taking  his  peaches  and  prunes,  melons  and  ginger.  Yet, 
they  claim  it  to  be  righteous. 

Motse  said : This  is  meant  to  confuse  us.  And  is  this 
at  all  different  from  confusion  in  the  distinctions  between 
black  and  white,  and  sweet  and  bitter  ? Suppose  a man 
who  upon  being  shown  a little  blackness  says  it  is  black, 
but  upon  being  shown  much  blackness  says  it  is  white.  He 
will  have  to  admit  that  his  sight  is  confused  and  that  he 
cannot  tell  the  difference  between  black  and  white.  Suppose 
a man  when  served  with  a little  bitter  says  it  is  bitter,  but 


WILL  OF  HEAVEN  (III) 


159 


when  served  witli  mucli  bitter  says  it  is  sweet.  Tlien  lie 
will  Lave  to  admit  that  bis  taste  is  impaired  and  that  he 
cannot  tell  the  difference  between  sweet  and  bitter.  In  the 
government  of  the  present  lords,  the  murderer  of  an  individual 
is  imprisoned  by  the  state.  This  ^ . . . But  the  murderer 
of  many  men  of  the  neighbouring  states  is  upheld  as  righteous. 
How  is  this  different  from  confusing  the  distinction  between 
black  and  white  and  sweet  and  bitter  ? 

Therefore  Motse  established  the  will  of  Heaven  to  be 
the  standard.  Not  only  Motse  established  the  will  of  Heaven 
to  be  the  standard,  it  is  also  the  theme  of  an  ode  in  the 

Ta  Ya”^  among  the  books  of  the  ancient  kings:  ‘'God 
said  to  King  Wen,  ‘I  cherish  your  intelligent  virtue.  It 
was  not  proclaimed  with  much  noise  or  gesture.  It  was  not 
modified  after  the  possession  of  the  empire.  Instinctively 
and  naturally  submissive  to  the  scheme  of  God.’  ” ® This 
is  to  proclaim  that  King  Wen  used  the  will  of  Heaven  as 
standard  and  was  submissive  to  God’s  scheme.  If  the  gentle- 
men of  the  world  really  desire  to  practise  magnanimity  and 
righteousness  and  be  superior  men,  seeking  to  attain  the  way 
of  the  sage-kings  on  the  one  hand  and  to  procure  blessings 
to  the  people  on  the  other,  they  must  not  neglect  to  under- 
stand the  will  of  Heaven.  The  will  of  Heaven  is  truly  the 
standard  of  righteousness. 

^ The  major  part  of  the  sentence  is  lost. 

® “Ta  Ya  " is  the  general  title  of  the  collection  of  the  major  odes  of 
the  Dynasty  of  Chou,  in  Bhih  CMng. 

® Supra,  p.  147,  note  1. 


BOOK  VIII 


, CHAPTER  XXXI 

On  Ghosts  (III) 

Motse  said  : WitE  the  passing  of  the  sage-kings  of  the 
Three  Djhasties,  the  world  lost  its  righteousness  and  the 
feudal  lords  took  might  as  right.  The  superior  and  the 
subordinates'  are  no  longer  gracious  and  loyal ; father  and 
son,  elder  and  younger  brother  are  no  longer  affectionate  and 
filial,  brotherly  and  respectful,  virtuous  and  kind.  The 
rulers  do  not  attend  diligently  to  government  and  the 
artisans  do  not  attend  earnestly  to  their  work.  The  people 
practise  immorality  and  wickedness  and  become  rebellious. 
Thieves  and  bandits  with  weapons,  poison,  water,  and  fire 
hold  up  innocent  travellers  on  the  highways  and  the  bypaths, 
robbing  them  of  their  carts  and  horses,  coats  and  fur  coats, 
to  enrich  themselves.  All  these  start  therewith  (with  the 
passing  of  the  sage-kings).  And  so  the  world  falls  into  chaos. 

How  what  is  the  reason  for  this  confusion  ? It  is  all 
because  of  the  doubt  of  the  existence  of  the  ghosts  and  spirits, 
and  the  ignorance  of  their  being  able  to  reward  virtue  and 
punish  vice.  If  all  the  people  in  the  world  believed  that  the 
spirits  are  able  to  reward  virtue  and  punish  vice,  how  could 
the  world  be  in  chaos  ? Those  who  deny  the  existence  of 
spirits  proclaim  : Of  course  there  are  no  spirits.''  And 
from  morning  till  evening  they  teach  this  doctrine  to  the 
people  of  the  empire.  They  bewilder  the  people,  causing 
them  all  to  doubt  the  existence  of  ghosts  and  spirits.  In 


ON  GHOSTS  (HI) 


161 


tliis  way  tke  empire  becomes  disorderly.  Tlierefore  Motse 
said : If  the  rnlers  and  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  really 
desire  to  procure  benefits  for  the  empire  and  remove  its 
calamities  they  must  understand  whether  ghosts -and  spirits 
exist. or  not,  ' 

Since  we  must  understand  whether  ghosts  and  spirits  exist 
or  notj  how  can  we  find  out  ? Motse  said : The  yay  to  find 
out  whether  anything  exists  or  not  is  to  depend  on  the 
testimony  of  the  ears  and  eyes  of  the  multitude.  If  some  have 
heard  it  or  some  have  seen  it  then  we  have  to  say  it  exists. 

If  no  one  has  heard  it  and  no  one  has  seen  it  then  we  have  to 
say  it  does  not  exist.  So,  then,  why  not  go  to  some  village  or 
some  district  and  inquire  ? If  from  antiquity  to  the  present, 
and  since  the  beginning  of  man,  there  are  men  •vfho  have  seen 
the  bodies  of  ghosts  and  spirits  and  heard  their  voice,  how  can 
we  say  that  they  do  not  exist  ? If  none  have  heard  them  and 
none  have  seen  them,  then  how  can  we  say  they  do  ? But 
those  who  deny  the  existence  of  the  spirits  say : Many 
in  the  world  have  heard  and  seen  something  of  ghosts  and 
spirits.  (Since  they  vary  in  their  testimony,)  who  are  to  be 
accepted  as  really  having  heard  and  seen  them  ? Motse  said : 

As  we  are  to  rely  on  what  many  have  jointly  seen  and  what 
many  have  jointly  heard,  the  case  of  Tu  Po  is  (to  be  accepted).^ 

King  Hsuan  of  Chou  (827-783  b.o,)  put  his  minister  Tu 
Po  to  death  though  he  was  innocent.  Tu  Po  remarked  : The 
king  puts  me  to  death  while  I am  innocent.  If  man  loses  his 

^ In  the  following  paragraphs  Motse  cites  a number  of  cases  to  support 
the  existence  of  spirits.  Most  of  the  persons  and  occasions  mentioned  are 
historical,  but  the  details  seem  to  have  come  from  the  fairy  tales  current 
at  his  time. 

M 

' 

4 


162 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


consciousness  after  his  death,  then  all  is  over.  If  I shall 
still  retain  mj  consciousness  after  death  I shall  let  the  king 
know  of  this  within  three  years/'  In  three  years,  King  Hsiian 
assembled  the  feudal  lords  at  P'u  Tien.  There  were  several 
hundred  carts.  Attendants  numbered  by  the  thousand  and 
the  multitude  covered  the  fields.  At  noon  Tu  Po  in  red 
garments  and  headgear  appeared  riding  in  a plain  chariot 
drawn  by  a white  horse,  holding  a red  bow  and  carrying  red 
arrows.  “He  pursued  King  Hsuan  and  shot  him  on  his  chariot. 
The  arrow  pierced  his  heart  and  broke  his  back.  He  fell  and 
died  prostrate.  At  the  time  all  the  people  of  Chou  who  were 
there  saw  it  and  those  far  away  heard  of  it,  and  it  was  recorded 
in  the  Spring  and  Autumn  ^ of  Chou.  Rulers  instructed  their 
ministers  with  it  and  fathers  warned  their  sons  with  it,  saying : 
"‘Be  careful,  be  respectful.  All  who  kill  the  innocent  are 
speedily  and  severely  visited  by  misfortune  and  punished  by 
the  ghosts  and  spirits  like  this.''  Judging  from  what  is 
recorded  here,  how  can  we  doubt  that  ghosts  and  spirits  exist  ? 

Not  only  does  the  record  in  this  book  prove  it  to  be  so. 
Formerly,  Lord  Mu  of  Ch'in  ^ (about  640  e.o.)  was  once  in 
the  temple  at  noon.  A spirit  entered  and  alighted.  He  had 
the  face  of  a man  but  the  body  of  a bird.  His  attire  was  plain 
and  dark.  His  appearance  was  dignified.  Seeing  him  Lord 
Mu  became  afraid  and  was  rushing  away.  The  spirit  said : 
^‘Do  not  be  afraid.  God  cherishes  your  intelligent  virtue, 
authorizing  me  to  prolong  your  age  by  nineteen  years,  and 
ordaming  your  state  to  be  prosperous  and  your  descendants 

^ Spring  and  Autumn  was  then  not  a proper  name,  title  of  the  annals 
of  Lu  written  by  Confucius,  but  a common  name  for  any  annals. 

^ The  text  says  Lord  Mu  of  Cheng.  But  the  incident  historically  belongs 
to  Lord  Mu  of  Ch’in. 


ON  GHOSTS  (III) 


163 


to  be  many  and  not  to  lose  CH’in/’  Lord  Mu  saluted  him 
repeatedly  and  bowed,  saying : May  I ask  the  name  of 
my  god  ? ’’  He  answered : ‘‘  I am  Kou  Mang.’^  If  we  are 
to  accept  what  Lord  Mu  of  Ch’in  had  seen  personally  as  reliable, 
then  how  can  we  doubt  that  spirits  and  ghosts  exist  ? 

Not  only  does  the  record  in  this  book  ^ prove  it  to  be  so. 
Formerly  Lord  Chien  of  Yen  (about  500  b.o.)  put  his  Minister 
Chuang  Tse  Yi  to  death  while  he  was  innocent.  Chuang  Tse 
Yi  remarked : ‘‘  The  lord  puts  me  to  death  though  I am 
innocent.  If  man  loses  his  consciousness  after  death  then  all  is 
done.  If  I shall  still  retain  my  consciousness  after  death,  I 
shall  let  the  Lord  know  of  this  within  three  years.”  In  a year, 
Yen  ^ was  going  to  repair  to  Tsu.  Such  ceremonies  were  the 
occasions  of  large  assemblages  of  men  and  women.  At  noon 
Lord  Chien  was  riding  on  the  road  to  Tsu.  Chuang  Tse  Yi 
carried  a red  staff  and  struck  and  prostrated  him.  At  the 
time  all  the  people  of  Yen  who  were  there  saw  it  and  all  those 
who  were  far  away  heard  of  it.  And  it  was  recorded  in  the 
Spring  and  Autumn  of  Yen.  The  feudal  lords  circulated  the 
news  around,  and  remarked:  “ So  speedy  and  severe  are  the 
misfortunes  and  punishment  from  the  spirits  and  ghosts  upon 
him  that  kills  the  innocent.”  Judging  from  the  record  in  this 
book,  how  can  we  doubt  that  spirits  and  ghosts  exist  1 

Not  only  does  the  record  in  this  book  prove  it  to  be  so. 
Anciently,  in  the  reign  of  Lord  Wen  of  Sung,  whose  name 
was  Pao  (610-589  b.o.),  there  was  a master  of  ceremonies  by 
the  name  of  Kuan  Ku.  While  he  was  working  in  the  temple, 

^ That  is,  the  historical  record  of  Ch’in. 

* Yen  is  the  name  of  the  state,  hut  here  means  the  lord  of  Yen,  who  is 
its  representative. 


164 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


a wizard  ^ carrying  a cane  appeared  and  said  to  Eiiii : Ktian 
Kn,  wliy  don’t  the  jades  and  stones  measure  up  to  the  standard, 
and  why  are  the  cakes  and  wine  unclean,  and  the  victims 
imperfect  and  not  fat,  and  the  sacrifices  not  in  season? 
Did  yon  do  this  or  did  Pao  do  this  ? ” Knan  Kn  answered  : 

Pao  is  still  small  and  in  his  swaddle-clothes.  l^Tiat  does  he 
have  to  do  with  this  ? It  is  all  done  by  the  official  in  charge, 
Knan  Kn.”  Thereupon  the  wizard  lifted  his  cane  and  struck 
him,  prostrating  him  on  the  altar.  At  the  time  those  people 
who  were  present  all  saw  it  and  those  far  away  heard  of  it. 
And  it  was  recorded  in  the  Spring  and  Autninn  of  Sung.  The 
feudal  lords  circulated  the  news  and  remarked  : So  speedy 
and  severe  is  the  punishment  from  spirits  and  ghosts  to  Mm 
who  is  not  reverent  in  performing  sacrifices ! ” Judging  from 
the  record  of  this  book,  how  can  we  doubt  that  spirits  and 
ghosts  exist  ? 

Not  only  does  the  record  in  this  book  prove  it  to  be  so. 
Formerly  the  Lord  Chuang  of  Ch’i  (794~‘731  b.c.)  had  two 
ministers,  Wang  Li  Kuo  and  Chung  Li  Chiao,  who  were 
engaged  in  a lawsuit.  For  three  years  no  judgment  could 
be  reached.  The  Lord  of  Gh’i  thought  of  putting  both  of  them 
to  death,  but  was  afraid  to  slay  the  innocent  *,  he  thought  of 
acquitting  both  of  them  but  was  afraid  to  let  loose  the  guilty. 
So  he  let  them  provide  a lamb  and  take  oath  on  the  altar  of 
Oh’i.  The  two  men  agreed  to  take  the  oath  of  blood.  The 
throat  of  the  Iamb  was  cut  and  its  blood  sprinkled  on  the 
altar.  The  case  of  Wang  Li  Kuo  was  read  all  through.  But 
before  half  of  the  case  of  Chung  Li  Chiao  was  read,  the  lamb 
arose  and  butted  at  him,  broke  his  leg  and  prostrated  him  on 

^ The  wizard  is  here  represented  as  a medium  of  the  spirits. 


ON  GHOSTS  {III) 


165 


the  altar.  At  the  time  all  the  people  of  Chh  who  were  present 
saw  it.  and  those  far  away  heard  of  it.  It  was  recorded  in  the 
Spring  and  Autumn  of  Ch’i,  The  feudal  lords  circulated  the 
news  around  and  remarked:  So  speedy  and  severe  is  the 
punishment  from  spirits  and  ghosts  to  him  that  takes  an  oath 
in  insincerity  ! Judging  from  the  record  in  this  book,  how 
can  we  doubt  that  spirits  and  ghosts  exist  ? 

Therefore  Motse  said : One  may  not  act  disrespectfully 
even  in  woods,  valleys,  or  solitary  caves  where  there  is  no 
man.  Spirits  and  ghosts  are  watching  everj^here. 

Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  spirits  ask : ''  Are  the 
senses  of  hearing  and  sight  of  the  multitude  sufficient  to 
decide  a doubt  ? How  can  people  strive  to  be  learned  gentle- 
men while  they  continue  to  trust  the  senses  of  hearing  and 
sight  of  the  multitude  ? ’’ 

Motse  said : If  the  senses  of  hearing  and  sight  of  the 
multitude  are  thought  to  be  not  trustworthy,  we  may  ask 
if  such  men  like  the  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Yao, 
Shim,  Yii,  T'ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  are  trustworthy  ? Of  course, 
about  this  all  people  above  the  mediocre  will  say  such  men 
like  the  ancient  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Yao,  Shim, 
Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  are  trustworthy.  If  the  ancient 
sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties  are  trustworthy,  we  may 
review  some  of  their  deeds. 

In  ancient  times,  having  captured  Yin  and  punished  Chow, 
King  Wu  let  the  feudal  lords  share  in  the  worship  (of  the 
ancestors  of  Yin) . Those  more  closely  related  were  to  partake 
in  the  temple  sacrifices  and  those  less  closely  related  in  the 
outdoor  sacrifices.  So  then  King  Wu  must  have  believed 
there  were  spirits  and  ghosts,  therefore  after  capturing  Yin 


166 


THE  WOEKS  Of  MOTSE 


and  punisliing  Chiow  lie  let  the  feudal  lords  share  in  the 
worship.  If  there  were  no  spirits  and  ghosts  why  did  King 
Wii  assign  the  duties  of  worship  ? 

Not  only  does  the  deed  of  King  Wu  prove  it  to  be  so.  When 
the  ancient  sage-kings  distributed  rewards  it  must  be  before 
their  ancestors.  When  they  meted  out  punishments  it  must 
be  before  the  altar.  Why  are  the  rewards  distributed  before 
the  ancestors  ? To  submit  their  fairness.  Why  are 
punishments  meted  out  before  the  altar  ? To  submit  their 
justice. 

Not  only  does  the  record  in  that  book  prove  it  to  be  so. 
On  the  day  when  the  ancient  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties 
of  Yti,  Hsia,  Shang,  and  Chou  ^ first  established  their  empire 
and  built  their  capitals,  they  invariably  chose  the  central 
altar  on  which  to  build  the  ancestral  temple.  They  would 
pick  out  the  luxuriant  and  elegant  among  the  trees  to  plant 
in  the  temple  of  agriculture.  They  would  select  the  affec- 
tionate and  filial,  virtuous  and  kind  among  the  elders  of  the 
country  to  be  masters  of  ceremonies.  They  would  pick 
out  the  victims  among  the  six  animals  by  their  fatness, 
perfection,  and  the  colour  of  their  wool.  The  jades  and 
stones  were  to  be  appropriate  in  material  and  satisfactory 
in  measurement.  And  the  cakes  and  wine  were  to  be 
prepared  with  the  most  fragrant  and  yellow  grain,  and  so 
the  quality  of  cakes  and  wine  would  vary  with  the  abundance 
of  the  year.  This  is  to  say,  in  the  government  of  the  ancient 
sage-kings,  spirits  and  ghosts  had  priority  over  the  people. 
Before  the  offices  and  courts  were  completely  established, 
the  sacrificial  vessels  and  sacrificial  robes  must  have  been 
^ The  “ Three  Dynasties denotes  only  the  last  three. 


ON  GHOSTS  (III) 


167 


all  stored  in  tlie  storeliouse,  the  masters  and  attendants 
of  ceremonies  must  have  all  been  installed  in  court,  and  the 
victims  must  be  kept  apart  from  the  original  flock.  Since 
the  government  of  the  ancient  sage-kings  was  like  this, 
the  ancient  sage-kings  must  have  believed  in  the  existence 
of  spirits  and  ghosts. 

Deep  was  their  own  interest  in  the  welfare  of  ghosts  and 
spirits.  Yet  they  were  afraid  their  descendants  might  not 
understand  it.  Thus  they  recorded  it  on  bamboos  and  silk 
to  bequeath  to  them.  Fearing  that  these  might  rot  and 
disappear  so  that  the  descendants  might  not  learn  it,  they 
engraved  it  on  plates  and  cups  and  cut  it  in  metals  and  stones. 
They  feared  also  that  the  descendants  might  not  be  reverent 
and  obtain  blessing,  and  so  among  the  books  of  the  ancient 
kings  and  the  records  of  sages  testimonies  to  the  existence  of 
ghosts  and  spirits  occur  time  and  again  even  on  a single 
foot  of  silk  or  a single  sheet  in  the  books.  Why  was  this  ? 
Because  the  sage-kings  were  interested  in  it.  Those  who 
deny  the  existence  of  spirits  are  opposing  the  interest  of  the 
sage-kings,  and  such  is  not  the  way  of  the  superior  man. 

Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  spirits  might  say : Among 
the  books  of  the  ancient  kings  not  a foot  of  silk  or  a sheet 
is  found  which  testifies  to  the  existence  of  ghosts  and  spirits 
once  and  again.  Then  where  are  these  testimonies  ? 

Motse  replied ; They  are  found  (for  instance)  in  the  Ta 
Ya  of  the  books  of  Chou.  Ta  Ya  ’’  tells  : The  rule 
of  King  Wen  over  the  people  pleased  Heaven.  Although 
Chou  is  an  old  country,  it  is  newly  commissioned  by  Heaven. 
Chou  does  not  appear  showy.  The  commission  from  God 
does  not  appear  to  be  seasonable.  King  Wen  reached  high 


168 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


and  low,  he  was  on  the  left  and  the  right  of  God.  How  active 
was  King  Wen ! He  dispensed  his  intelligent  virtue  without 
ceasing.”  ^ If  ghosts  and  spirits  do  not  exist,  then  how 
could  Bang  'Wen  be  “ on  the  left  and  right  of  God  ” since  he 
was  already  dead  ? Here  we  have  a testimony  of  ghosts 
in  the  hook  of  Chou. 

If  there  are  testimonies  only  in  the  books  of  Chou  and 
none  in  those  of  Shang  still  it  could  not  be  reliable.  But 
we  find  among  the  books  of  Shang  the  following:  “Oh! 
Anciently,  before  Hsia  was  visited  by  misfortune,  of  the 
various  animals  and  insects  and  even  birds  none  deviated 
from  their  proper  course.  As  to  those  who  have  faces  of 
men,  who  dare  be  divergent  in  heart  ? Even  the  bifig  and 
rivers  ghosts  and  spirits  dared  not  be  insurgent.”  ^ If  one 
is  respectful  and  sincere  one  could  maintain  harmony  in  the 
world  and  stability  to  the  lower  earth.  Now  it  was  to  assist 
Yii  that  hills  and  rivers  ghosts  and  spirits  dared  not  be 
insurgent.  Here  we  have  a testimony  of  ghosts  in  the  book 
of  Shang. 

If  there  are  testimonies  of  ghosts  only  in  the  books  of 
Shang  and  none  in  those  of  Hsia  it  is  still  not  reliable.  But 
we  have  “ Speech  at  Kan  ” ® among  the  books  of  Haifl.  running 
thus : “ In  the  midst  of  the  war  at  Kan  the  Emperor  called 

1 This  quotation  is  from  the  ode  “ Wen  Wang  ” in  the  collection 

“ Ta  Ya in  SUh  Ghing,  It  is  a eulogy  of  the  career  of  King  Wen, 
Legge's  rendition  is  found,  in  vol.  iv,  pp.  427-8. 

2 The  quotation  is  from  the“  Instructions  of  E ” in  Bhu  OMng,  But  the 
two  texts  differ  widely  in  wording.  For  comparison,  see  Legge,  voL  iii, 
pp.  193-4. 

3 The  text  says  “ Speech  of  Yff  Some  ancient  writers  seem  to  use  both 
titles  for  the  same  work.  In  the  present  text  of  Bhu  Ghing  the  essay  is  called 
“ Speech  at  Kan 


ON  GHOSTS  (III) 


169 


tlie  six  associates  to  receive  instructions  in  the  headquarters. 
He  said  : , ' The  Prince  of'  Pin  violated  the  five  elements  and, 
disused  the  three  calendars.  Heaven  decreed  to  exterminate 
his  life  ! ' And  he  continued : " At  noon  I shall  grapple 
with  the  Prince  of  Hu  for  the  fate  of  the  day.  But  (mind 
yoii)j  you  ministers  and  people,  it  is  not  because  I covet 
their  land  and  treasures.  I am  only  carrying  out  the  punish- 
ment in  obedience  to  Heaven.  If  you  on  the  left  do  not 
do  your  part  on  the  left  you  will  be  disobeying  my  orders  ; 
if  you  on  the  right  do  not  do  your  part  on  the  right  you  will 
be  disobeying  my  orders  ; if  you  charioteers  do  not  manage 
your  horses  according  to  orders  you  will  be  disobeying 
my  orders.  And  rewards  wdll  be  distributed  before  my 
ancestors  and  punishments  will  be  meted  out  before  the 
altar/  ^ Why  were  rewards  distributed  before  the 
ancestors  ? To  submit  their  fairness.  Why  were  punish- 
ments meted  out  before  the  altar  1 To  submit  their  justice. 
Because  the  ancient  sage-kings  must  reward  virtue  and  punish 
vice  with  ghosts  and  spirits,  they  distributed  rewards  before 
the  ancestors  and  meted  out  punishments  before  the  altar. 
And  here  we  have  a testimony  of  ghosts  in  the  books  of  Hsia. 

Now,  first  in  the  books  of  Hsia  and  next  in  the  books  of 
Shang  and  Chou,  testimonies  to  the  existence  of  ghosts  and 
spirits  occur  again  and  again.  What  is  the  reason  for  this  ? 
Because  the  sage-kings  were  interested  in  it.  Judging 
from  the  records  of  these  books,  how  can  we  doubt  that  there 
are  ghosts  and  spirits  ? 

^ This  is  almost  the  whole  of  the  “ Speech  at  ICan  But  in  many  places 
the  texts  diSer  greatly.  For  the  text  in  Shn  GMng,  see  Begge,  vol.  iii, 

pp. 


170 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 

Anciently,  on  the  propitions  day  of  ting  mao,^  Chon  offered 
thanlrsgiving  to  Earth  and  the  Four  Quarters,  and  their 
ancestors.  They  did  this  to  prolong  their  age.  If  there 
were  no  ghosts  and  spirits,  how  could  their  age  be  prolonged  ? 

Motse  said:  As  to  the  fact  that  ghosts  and  spirits  can 
reward  virtue  as  well  as  punish  vice,  if  it  could  be  pro- 
claimed to  the  whole  country  and  to  all  the  people  it  would 
really  he  a source  of  orderliness  in  the  country  and  blessing 
to  the  people.  The  corruption  of  the  officials  in  their  public 
charges  and  the  immorality  among  men  and  women  will 
all  be  seen  by  ghosts  and  spirits.  The  vice  of  those  who, 
with  weapons,  poisons,  and  water  and  jSire,  waylay  innocent 
travellers  and  rob  them  of  their  carts  and  horses,  coats 
and  fur  coats  to  enrich  themselves  will  be  seen  by  ghosts 
and  spirits.  Thereupon  the  officials  will  not  dare  be  corrupt 
in  office,  withholding  reward  when  they  find  the  virtuous 
or  withholding  punishment  when  they  find  the  wiched. 
And  those  among  the  people  who  commit  vice  and  cruelties 
and  with  weapons,  poisons,  and  water  and  fire  waylay  the 
innocent  travellers,  robbing  them  of  their  carts  and  horses, 
coats  and  fur  coats  to  enrich  themselves — all  these  will 
be  no  more.  And  the  world  will  have  order.  Really  the 
intelligence  of  the  ghosts  and  spirits  cannot  be  combated. 
Even  in  solitary  caves,  big  ponds,  woods  and  valleys,  the 
ghosts  and  spirits  are  watching.  And  the  punishments  from 
ghosts  and  spirits  cannot  be  evaded.  Even  wealth  and 
great  numbers,  daring  and  strength,  strong  armour  and 

^ Ting  Mao  "J"  is  tke  name  of  the  day  according  to  the  Chinese 
calendar  then  in  use.  E’er  a discussion  of  the  Chinese  Sexagenary  Cycle, 
see  p.  229,  note  1. 


ON  GHOSTS  (III)  171 

sharp  weapons,  the  punishment  of  ghosts  and  spirits  will 
frustrate. 

If  this  is  doubted,  look  at  the  story  of  the  ancient  King 
Chieh  of  Hsia.  He  was  an  emperor  in  honour  and  possessed 
the  whole  empire  in  wealth.  He  cursed  Heaven  and 
blasphemed  against  the  spirits  above  and  destroyed  the 
multitudes  below.^  Thereupon  Heaven  commissioned  T’ang 
to  carry  out  the  judicious  punishment.  With  nine  chariots  ^ 
T’ang  arranged  the  Bird  Formation  and  the  Wild  Goose  March. 
He  climbed  the  Ta  Tsan  ^ and  scattered  the  forces  of  Hsia 
and  entered  its  land.  And  he  captured  T’uei  Yi  Ta  Hsi. 
Now,  King  Chieh  of  Hsia  was  an  emperor  in  honour  and 
possessed  the  whole  empire  in  wealth.  In  his  service  was  the 
man  of  great  daring  and  strength,  T'uei  Yi  Ta  Hsi,  who  had 
torn  apart  a buffalo  alive.  He  could  kill  a man  at  the  move 
of  a finger,  and  the  number  of  those  killed  amounted  to 
a million,  and  they  were  thrown  into  lakes  and  mountains. 
Yet,  for  all  this,  Chieh  could  not  evade  the  punishment  from 
ghosts  and  spirits.  This  is  why  I say  even  wealth  and 
numbers,  daring  and  strength,  strong  armour  and  sharp 
weapons  cannot  combat  the  punishment  from  ghosts  and 
spirits. 

Not  only  is  this  so.  Anciently,  King  Chow  of  Yin  was 
also  an  emperor  in  honour  and  possessed  the  whole  empire 
in  wealth.  He  cursed  Heaven  and  blasphemed  against  the 

^ There  is  a sentence  in  the  text  following  this  which  does  not  seem  to 
make  any  sense  as  it  stands,  and  is  therefore  not  translatable.  In  Chinese 
it  is  ^ ^ ill  . 

® Each  chariot  unit  consists  of  twenty -five  men.  It  seems  it  should  be 
“ ninety  chariots  instead  of  ‘‘nine". 

® Ta  Tsan  is  most  likely  the  name  of  a pass. 


172 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


spirits  above  and  destroyed  the  mii].titiides  below.  He 
exposed  tbe  aged  and  murdered  tbe  cliildren,  tortured  tbe 
innocent,  and  opened  a pregnant  woman.  The  common 
people  and  the  widows  and  the  widowers  cried  aloud,  but 
were  not  heard.  Thereupon  Heaven  commissioned  King 
Wu  to  carry  out  the  judicious  punishment.  With  a hundred 
selected  chariots  and  four  hundred  warriors  King  Wu  appointed 
his  officials  and  reviewed  his  forces.  He  battled  the  armies 
of  Yin  in  the  Wilderness  of  Mu.  He  captured  Fei  Chung 
and  E Lai,  and  the  multitude  deserted  and  ran  away. 
King  Wu  rushed  into  the  palace.^  He  executed  Chow  and 
hung  him  on  a red  ring  with  his  crimes  published  on  a white 
flag,  to  punish  him  for  the  feudal  lords  in  the  empire.  Now 
King  Chow  of  Yin  was  an  emperor  in  honour  and  possessed 
the  whole  empire  in  wealth.  He  had  men  of  such  dariag 
and  strength  as  Fei  Chung, ^ E Lai,^  and  Duke  Hu  of  Ch’ung,^ 
who  could  kill  a man  at  the  move  of  a finger ; and  the  number 
of  those  killed  amounted  to  a million,  and  they  were  thrown 
into  the  lakes  and  mountains.  Yet  with  all  these  Chow  could 
not  evade  the  punishment  from  the  ghosts  and  spirits.  This 
is  why  I say  even  wealth  and  numbers,  daring  and  strength, 
strong  armour  and  sharp  weapons  cannot  frustrate  the 
punishment  from  ghosts  and  spirits. 

Moreover,  Chin  Ai  has  said : ''  No  virtue  is  too  small ; 
no  extermination  of  a lineage  is  too  big.’’  This  is  to  say. 
in  distribution  of  rewards  by  ghosts  and  spirits  no  man  is 
too  insignificant  to  be  rewarded  for  his  virtue.  And  in  the 

^ Tile  four  words  following  this  do  not  seem  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
this  narration.  In  Chinese  they  are  ^ ^ 1^. 

^ All  these  men  are  the  vicious  associates  of  Chow. 


ON  GHOSTS  (III) 


173 


meting  out  of  punislinients  by  ghosts  and  spirits  no  man 
is  too  great  to  be  punished. 

Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  spirits  say,  “ If  on© 
does  not  work  for  the  blessing  of  one^s  parents  but  work 
for  their  destruction,  would  one  still  be  a filial  son  ? '' 

Mots©  explained : The  ghosts  and  spirits  of  all  times 
may  be  divided  into  spirits  of  Heaven,  spirits  of  hills  and 
rivers,  and  ghosts  of  men  after  their  death.  It  is  true  that 
there  are  sons  who  die  before  their  fathers,  and  younger 
brothers  before  their  elder  brothers.  But,  as  the  saying 
in  the  world  goes : “He  who  is  born  first  dies  first.’’  So 
then  those  who  die  first  would  be  the  mother  if  not  the  father, 
and  the  elder  sister  if  not  the  elder  brother. 

At  any  rate,  we  should  prepare  clean  cakes  and  wine 
reverently  to  do  sacrifice.  If  ghosts  and  spirits  do  exist, 
then  it  is  to  serve  father  and  mother,  elder  sisters  and  elder 
brothers  with  food  and  drink.  Is  not  this  a great  blessing  ? 
If  ghosts  and  spirits  did  not  exist  it  would  seem  to  be  a 
waste  of  the  material  for  the  cakes  and  wine.  But  such 
use  is  not  just  to  throw  it  into  the  ditch  or  gully.  For  the 
relatives  from  the  clan  and  friends  from  the  village  and 
district  can  yet  eat  and  drink  them.  So,  even  if  there  were 
really  no  ghosts  and  spirits,  a sacrifice  will  yet  gather  together 
a party  and  the  participants  can  enjoy  themselves  and 
befriend  the  neighbours.  Those  who  hold  there  are  no  ghosts 
say  : “Of  course  there  are  no  ghosts  and  spirits  and  there- 
fore I should  not  expend  my  wealth  on  the  cakes  and  wine 
and  victims.  This  is  not  because  I am  miserly  about  my 
wealth  on  the  cakes  and  wine  and  victims.  But  (because 
I do  not  see)  what  I can  accomplish  with  it.”  This  is  opposed 


174 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


to  the  records  of  the  sage-kings  above  and  opposed  to  the 
practice  among  the  filial  sons  among  the  people.  Yet  they 
claim  to  be  superior  men  in  the  empire.  This  is  no  way  to 
be  superior  men.  But  Motse  said  : For  me  to  offer  sacrifice  is 
not  to  throw  it  into  the  ditch  or  the  gully.  It  is  to  bless  the 
ghosts  above  and  gather  a party  and  enjoy  ourselves  and 
befriend  the  neighbours  below.  And  if  spirits  exist,  I would 
be  serving  my  father  and  mother  and  brother  with  food. 
Is  this  not  a great  blessing  in  the  world  ? 

Therefore  Motse  said  : If  the  rulers  and  the  gentlemen  of 
the  world  really  desire  to  procure  benefits  for  the  world  and 
eliminate  its  calamities  they  must  believe  in  and  teach  the 
existence  of  ghosts  and  spirits.  This  is  the  way  of  the  sage- 
kings. 


CHAPTER  XXXII 
Condemnation  oe  Music  (I) 

Mots©  said ; The  policy  of  the  magnanimous  will  pursue 
what  procures  benefits  of  the  world  and  destroy  its  calamities. 
If  anything,  when  established  as  a law,  is  beneficial  to  the 
people  it  will  be  done ; if  not,  it  will  not  be  done.  Moreover, 
the  magnanimous  in  their  care  for  the  world  do  not  think 
of  doing  those  things  which  delight  the  eyes,  please  the  ears, 
gratify  the  taste,  and  ease  the  body.  When  these  deprive 
the  people  of  their  means  of  clothing  and  food,  the  magnani- 
mous would  not  undertake  them.  So  the  reason  why  Motse 
condemns  music  is  not  because  that  the  sounds  of  the 
big  bell,  the  sounding  drum,  the  ch'in^  and  the  she^ 
and  the  yii^  and  the  sheng^  are  not  pleasant,  that  the 
carvings  and  ornaments  are  not  delightful,  that  the  fried 
and  the  broiled  meats  of  the  grass-fed  and  the  grain-fed 
animals  are  not  gratifying,  or  that  the  high  towers,  grand 
arbours,  and  quiet  villas  are  not  comfortable.  Although 
the  body  knows  they  are  comfortable,  the  mouth  knows  they 
are  gratifying,  the  eyes  laiow  they  are  delightful,  and  the 
ears  know  they  are  pleasing,  yet  they  are  found  not  to  be  in 
accordance  with  the  deeds  of  the  sage-kings  of  antiquity 
and  not  to  contribute  to  the  benefits  of  the  people  at  present. 
And,  so,  Motse  proclaims : To  have  music  is  wrong. 

^ Ch'in  ^ is  a Ciiinese  horizontal  psaltery  of  five,  sis,  or  seven  strings, 
according  to  the  fashion  of  the  dynasty.  She  is  a psaltery  of  twenty-five 
strings. 

2 Yii  ^ is  a hand  organ  of  thirty-six  reed  pipes.  Sheng  ^ is  one  of 
seventeen  bamboo  pipes. 


176 


THE  "WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


Now  the  rulers  construct  musical  instruments  as  an  imder- 
taking  of  the  state.  They  cannot -be  produced  as  easily  as  by 
evaporating  water  or  digging  into  the  earth.  Inevitably 
heavy  taxes  have  to  be  collected  from  the  people  to  obtain 
sounds  of  the  big  bell,  the  sounding  drum,  the  ch'in  and  the 
she,  and  the , yli  and  the  sheng.  The  ancient  sage-kings  had, 
indeed,  collected  heavy  taxes  from  the  people  to  build  boats 
and  vehicles.  But ^ when,,  they  were  completed,  and  when 
the  people  asked : What  use  have  we  for  these  ? ''  the  answer 
was : ''  The  boats'  are  to  be  employed  on  water  and  the 
vehicles  on  land,  so  that  the  gentlemen  can  rest  their  feet 
and  the  labourers''  can-rest  their  shoulders  and  backs.’"  Thus 
the  people  contributed  their  money  and  dared  not  grumble 
about  it.  This  was  because  the  boats  and  vehicles  contributed 
to  the  benefit  of  the  people.  If  the  musical  instruments 
also  contribute  to  the  benefit  of  the  people,  even  I shall  not 
dare  condemn'  them.' . Thus .'if  the  musical  instruments  are 
as  useful  as  the  boats  and  carts  with  the' sage-kings,  even 
I shall  not  dare  condemn  them. 

There  are  three  things  that  the  people  worry  about,  namely, 
that  the  hungry  cannot  be  fed,  that  the  cold  cannot  be  clothed, 
and  that  the  tired  cannot^ get  rest.  These  three  are  the 
great  worries  of  the  people.  Now  suppose  we  strike  the  big 
bell,  boat  the  sounding  drum,  play  the  ch"in  and  the  she,  and 
blow  the  yix  and  the  sheng,*  can  the  material  for  food  and 
clothing  then  he  procured  for  the  people  ? Even  I do  not 
think  this  is  possible.  Again,  every  large  state  now  attacks 
small  states  and  every  large  house  molests  small  houses. 
The  strong  plunder  the  weak,  the  many  oppress  the  few^  the 
clever  deceive  the  stupid  and  the  honoured  disdain  the  humble. 


CONDEMNATION  OF  MUSIC  (I)  177 

And  bandits  and  . tMeves  rise  aU  together  and  cannot  be 
suppressed.  But  can  the  chaos  in  the;  world  be  put  in  order 
by  striking  the  big  bell,  beating  the  sounding  drum,  playing 
the  ch’in  and  the  she,  and  blowing  the  yii  and  the  sheng  ? 
Even  I do  not  think  it  is  possible.  Therefore  Motse  said: 
The  levy  of  heavy  taxes  on  the  people  to  construct  the  big 
bell,  the  sounding  drum,  the  ch’in  and  the  she,  and  the  yii 
and  the  sheng,  is  not  at  all  helpful  in  the  endeavour  to  procure 
the  benefits  of  the  world  and  destroy  its  calamities.  There- 
fore Motse  said : To  have  music  is  wrong. 

As  the  rulers  look  down  from  a high  tower  or  in  a grand 
arbour,  a bell  is  just  like  an  inverted  ting.^  If  it  is  not 
struck  wherefrom  would  come  th)  pleasure  ? Therefore 
it  ipust  be  struck.  To  strike  it  of  course  the  aged  and  the 
yodng  would  not  be  employed.  For  their  eyes  and  ears 
are  not  keen,  their  arms  are  not  strong,  and  they  cannot 
produce  an  harmonious  tone  with  varied  expression.  So, 
those  in  the  prime  of  life  must  be  employed  because  their 
eyes  and  ears  are  keen,  their  limbs  strong,  their  voices 
harmonious  and  varied  in  expression.  If  men  are  employed 
it  interferes  with  their  ploughing  and  planting.  If  women 
are  employed  it  interferes  with  their  weaving  and  spinning. 
Now,  the  rulers  take  to  music  hnd  deprive  the  people  of  their 
means  of  clothing  and  food  to  such  an  extent ! Therefore 
Motse  said : To  have  music  is  wrong. 

Now  when  the  big  bell,  the  sounding  drum,  the  ch’in  and 
the  she,  and  the  yii  and  the  sheng  are  provided  it  is  yet  no 
pleasure  for  the  lords  alone  to  listen  to  the  playing.  There- 
fore they  must  enjoy  it  with  either  the  common  people  or 
^ Ting  ^ is  a tripod-staped  sacrificial  vessel. 

; N 


178 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


the  gentlemen.  If  with  the  gentlemen,  it  will  interfere  with 
their  attending  to  government.  If  with  the  common  people 
it  will  interfere  with  their  work.  Now  the  rulers  take  to 
music  and  deprive  the  people  of  so  many  of  their  oppor- 
tunities to  produce  food  and  clothing  ! Therefore  Motse 
said  : It  is  wrong  to  have  music. 

Formerly,  Lord  K’ang  of  Ch’i  (404-379  b.c.)  loved  music 
and  dancing.  The  dancers  were  not  to  wear  garments  of  coarse 
cloth  or  to  eat  husks  and  bran.  For  if  food  and  drink  are 
not  dainty  the  appearance  and  complexion  will  not  be 
enjoyable.  And  if  clothing  is  not  elegant  the  body  and 
the  movement  will  not  be  delightful.  Therefore  their  food 
must  consist  of  grain  and  meat  and  their  clothing  must  be 
made  of  silk  and  embroidery.  They  did  not  produce  material 
of  clothing  and  food  at  all,  but  lived  on  others  all  the  time. 
Hence  Motse  said  : Now  the  lords  take  to  music  and  deprive 
the  people  of  so  many  of  their  opportunities  to  produce  food 
and  clothing ! Therefore  Motse  proclaimed  : To  have  music 
is  wrong. 

Also,  man  is  different  from  birds  and  beasts  and  insects. 
The  birds,  beasts,  and  insects  have  their  feathers  and  furs 
for  coats  and  fur  coats,  have  their  hoofs  and  claws  for  sandals 
and  shoes,  and  have  water  and  grass  for  drink  and  food. 
Therefore  the  male  do  not  sow  seeds  or  plant  trees,  neither 
do  the  female  weave  or  spin,  yet  food  and  clothing  are 
provided.  Now,  man  is  different  from  these.  Those  who 
exert  themselves  will  live.  Those  who  do  not  exert  themselves 
cannot  live.  When  the  gentlemen  do  not  attend  to  government 
diligently,  the  jurisdiction  will  be  in  chaos.  When  the  common 
men  do  not  attend  to  work,  supply  will  not  be  sufficient. 


CONDEMNATION  OE  MUSIC  (I) 


179 


If  tlie  gentlemen  of  the  world  should  doubt  my  word, 
let  us  enumerate  the  several,  duties  in  the  world  and  see  the 
harm  music  does  (to  them) : For  the  rulers  to  go  to  court 
early  and  retire  late  to  listen  to  lawsuits  and  attend  to 
government  is  their  duty.  For  the  gentlemen  to  exhaust 
the  energy  of  their  limbs  and  employ  fully  the  wisdom  of  their 
minds  to  attend  to  the  court  within  and  to  collect  taxes 
without  from  passes,  markets,  and  products  from  mountains, 
woods,  and  water  and  fields  in  order  to  fill  up  the  granaries 
and  the  treasury  is  their  duty.  For  the  farmers  to  set  out 
early  and  come  back  late,  to  sow  seeds  and  plant  trees  in 
order  to  produce  a large  quantity  of  soy  beans  and  millet  ^ 
is  their  duty.  For  the  women  to  rise  up  at  dawn  and  retire 
in  the  night  to  weave  and  spin  in  order  to  produce  much  silk, 
flax  linen,  and  cloth  is  their  duty.  Now  if  the  rulers  should 
love  music  and  listen  to  it,  they  would  not  be  able  to  go  to 
court  early  and  retire  late  to  listen  to  lawsuits  and  attend 
to  government.  Then  the  country  would  be  in  chaos  and 
the  state  would  be  in  danger.  If  the  gentlemen  should 
love  music  and  listen  to  it,  they  would  not  be  able  to  exhaust 
the  energy  in  their  limbs  and  employ  fully  the  wisdom  in 
the  mind  to  attend  to  court  within  and  collect  taxes  without 
from  passes  and  markets  and  products  from  mountains, 
woods,  water,  and  fields  to  fill  up  the  granaries  and  the 
treasury.  Then  the  granaries  and  the  treasury  would  not 
be  filled.  If  the  farmers  should  love  music  and  listen  to  it, 
they  w^ould  not  be  able  to  set  out  early  and  come  back  late 
to  sow  seeds  and  plant  trees  and  produce  a large  quantity  of 
soy  beans  and  millet.  Then  the  soy  beans  and  millet  would 

^ Soy  beans  and  millet  are  used  to  represent  grains  in  general. 


180 


THE  WORKS  OE  MOTSE 


not  be  sufficient.  If  tbe  women  sliould  love  music  and  listen 
to  it,  they  would  not  be  able  to  rise  up  at  dawn  and  retire 
in  tbe  niglit  to  weave  and  spin  and  produce  inncb.  silk,  flax 
linen,  and  cloth.  Then  cloth  and  linen  will  not  be  sufficient. 
If  it  is  asked  what  is  it  that  interfered  with  the  rulers’ 
attending  to  government  and  the  common  man’s  attending 
to  work  ? it  must  be  answered,  music.  Therefore  Motse  said : 
To  have  music  is  wrong. 

How  do  we  know  it  is  so  ? It  is  found  in  the  Code  of 
Punishment  of  T’ang  ” among  the  books  of  the  ancient  kings. 
This  proclaims : ‘‘  To  have  constant  dancing  in  the  palace 
is  called  the  witch’s  pleasure.”  ^ As  to  its  punishment,  a 
gentleman  will  be  fined  six  hundred  and  forty  ^ pieces  of  silk, 
a common  man  will  be  let  go  free.  Again,  Ah ! How  much 
is  the  dancing.  His  word  is  all  known.  God  does  not  bless 
him,  therefore  the  nine  districts^  are  lost  to  him.  God 
does  not  favour  him,  therefore  He  visited  him  with  various 
curses.  His  family  must  he  destroyed  too.”  ^ Now  the 
reason  that  the  nine  districts  are  lost  to  him  (Chieh  of  Hsia) 
lies  in  his  attention  to  embellish  music. 

^ Tliereis  not  sncIi  a,  book  as  the  “ Code  of  Punishment  of  T'ang  " in  Shu 
Ghing,  A passage  resembling  this  quotation  is  found  in  the  ‘‘Instruc- 
tions of  E According  to  Legge,  vol.iii,  p,  196,  it  runs  thus  : “ He  laid 
down  the  punishments  for  officers  and  warned  them  who  were  in  authority, 
saying  : ‘ If  you  dare  to  have  constant  dancing  in  your  palaces,  and  drunken 
singing  in  your  chambers — that  is  called  sorcerers'  fashion.*  ** 

® The  correctness  of  this  number  is  doubtful. 

® The  Empire  at  the  time  consisted  of  nine  districts. 

* Cf.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  p.  198>  “Instructions  of  E ’*  in  Shu  Ghing.  The  two 
texts  differ  widely  both  in  wording  and  even  in  meaning.  Competent 
critics  agree  in  thinking  the  text  in  Motse  is  more  likely  the  original  Shu 
Ghing  text. 


CONDEMNATION  OE  MUSIC  (I) 


181 


Quoting  Wu  Kuan  ^ Ch’i  ^ thereupon  abandoned 
bimself  to  lust  and  music.  He  drank  and  ate  in  improper 
places.  Ding  ding,  dong  dong  went  the  wood  winds  and 
percussion  instruments  in  harmony.  He  indulged  in  drinldng 
and  ate  in  improper  places.  Brilliantly  went  on  the  dancing. 
It  reached  the  hearing  of  Heaven,  and  Heaven  was  not 
pleased.’’  So,  it  was  not  pleasing  to  Heaven  above  and  not 
beneficial  to  the  people  below. 

Therefore  Motse  said : If  the  gentlemen  really  desire 
to  procure  benefits  for  the  world  and  destroy  its  calamities 
they  cannot  but  prohibit  such  a thing  as  music. 


1 Wu  Kuan  is  a book  that  is  no  more  existent. 

2 Chi  is  the  son  of  Yii  and  second  Emperor  of  Hsia  Dynasty- 


BOOK  IX 

CHAPTER  XXXV 
Anti-Fatalism  (I) 

Motse  said  : At  present,  in  governing  ike  states  the  rulers 
all  desire  to  have  their  countries  wealthy,  their  population 
large,  and  their  administration  orderly.  But  instead  of 
wealth  they  obtain  poverty,  instead  of  an  increase  they 
obtain  a decrease  in  population,  instead  of  order  they  obtain 
chaos  *,  i.e.  they  lose  what  they  like  but  obtain  what  they 
dislike.  What  is  the  reason  for  this  ? Motse  said ; It  is 
due  to  the  large  number  of  fatalists  among  the  people. 

The  fatalists  say : When  fate  decrees  that  a man  shall 
be  wealthy  he  will  be  wealthy  ; when  it  decrees  poverty,  he 
will  be  poor ; when  it  decrees  a large  population,  this  will 
be  large ; and  when  it  decrees  a small  population  this  will 
be  small ; if  order  is  decreed,  there  will  be  order  ; if  chaos, 
there  will  be  chaos.  If  fate  decrees  old  age,  there  will  be 
old  age ; if  untimely  death,  there  will  be  untimely  death. 
Even  if  a man  sets  himself  against  his  fate,  what  is  the  use  ? ” 
With  this  doctrine  the  rulers  are  urged  above  and  the  people 
are  kept  away  from  their  work  below.  Hence  the  fatalists 
are  umnagnanimous.  And  their  doctrines  must  be  clearly 
examined. 

Now,  how  is  this  doctrine  to  be  examined  1 Motse  said : 
Some  standard  of  judgment  must  be  established.  To  expound 
a doctrine  without  regard  to  the  standard  is  similar  to  de- 
termining the  directions  of  sunrise  and  sunset  on  a revolving 


ANTI-FATALISM  (I) 


183 


potter’s  wheel  By  this  means  the  distinction  of  right 
and  wrong,  benefit  and  harm,  cannot  be  known.  Therefore 
there  must  be  three  tests.  What  are  the  three  tests  ? Motse 
said  : Its  basis,  its  verifiability,  and  its  applicability.  How 
is  it  to  be  based  ? It  should  be  based  on  the  deeds  of  the 
ancient  sage-kings.  How  is  it  to  be  verified  ? It  is  to  be 
verified  by  the  senses  of  hearing  and  sight  of  the  common 
people.  How  is  it  to  be  applied  ? It  is  to  be  applied  by 
adopting  it  in  government  and  observing  its  benefits  to  the 
country  and  the  people.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  three 
tests  of  every  doctrine. 

Some  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  assume  there  to  be 
fate.  Now  let  us  examine  the  deeds  of  the  sage-kings.  In 
ancient  times,  the  confusion  produced  by  Chieh  was  replaced 
by  an  orderly  government  by  T’ang,  the  chaos  of  Chow  was 
turned  into  order  by  King  Wu.  The  times  did  not  alter  and 
the  people  did  not  change,  yet  xmder  Chieh  and  Chow  the 
world  was  chaotic  and  under  T’ang  and  Wu  it  was  orderly. 
Can  it  be  said  that  there  is  fate  ? 

But  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  still  assume  that  there 
is  fate.  Now  let  us  look  at  some  of  the  writings  of  the  early 
kings.  The  writings  of  the  early  kings  that  were  issued  to 
the  whole  country  and  distributed  among  the  people  were 
the  laws  Did  any  of  the  laws  of  the  early  kings  ever 
say : Blessing  cannot  be  invoked  and  disaster  cannot  be 

avoided ; reverence  will  not  do  any  good  and  cruelty  will 
not  do  any  harm  ” ? The  standards  according  to  which 
lawsuits  were  tried  and  punishments  were  meted  out 
were  the  codes  of  punishment  flij.  Did  any  of  the  codes  of 
punishment  of  the  early  kings  say:  “Blessing  cannot  be 


184 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

invoked  and  disaster  cannot  be  avoided ; reverence  will 
not  do  any  good  and  cruelty  will  not  do  any  barm  ''  ? Tbe 
inspiration  by  wbicb  tbe  armies  w^ere  organized  and  tbe 
soldiers  were  commanded  to  advance  or  to  retreat  came 
from  tbe  declarations  Did  any  of  tbe  declarations  of 
tbe  early  kings  say  ; Blessing  cannot  be  invoked  and  disaster 
cannot  be  avoided ; reverence  will  do  no  good  and  cruelty 
will  do  no  barm  ? Motse  said : I have  not  enumerated 
tbe  good  books  of  tbe  empire  completely.  As  they  cannot 
be  exhaustively  enumerated,  I bmit  myself  to  tbe  most 
prominent  ones,  namely,  tbe  three  ^ above  mentioned.  And 
try  as  we  may,  we  cannot  find  any  bebef  in  tbe  doctrine  of 
fatalism.  Should  it  not  then  be  abandoned  ? 

To  adopt  the  fatalists’  doctrine  is  to  overthrow  righteousness 
in  tbe  world.  To  overthrow  righteousness  in  tbe  world 
will  establish  fate,  which  is  a temptation  to  tbe  people. 
And  to  oSer  people  temptation  is  to  destroy  the  people. 
Now,  why  is  it  that  we  desire  righteousness  to  be  with  the 
superiors  ? Because  when  the  righteous  are  in  authority, 
the  world  will  have  order,  God,  bills  and  rivers,  and  tbe  spirits 
will  have  their  chief  sacrificer,  and  tbe  people  will  be  visited 
by  tbe  great  blessings  therefrom.  How  do  we  know  ? Motse 
said:  In  ancient  times,  T’ang  was  given  a fief  at  Po. 
Making  allowance  for  tbe  irregular  boundary  lines,  his  land 
amounted  to  about  a hundred  li  square.  He  worked  with 
the  people  for  mutual  love  and  reciprocal  benefit,  and  shared 
with  them  what  was  in  abundance.  And  he  led  bis  people  to 

1 The  text  has  “ five which  should  be  “ three  ” as  in  the  translation. 
The  three  refer  to  the  laws,  the  codes  of  punishment,  and  the  declarations. 
The  error  might  be  due  to  copying  3E,  five,  for  three,  by  some  copyist. 


ANTI-FATALISM  (I) 


185 


reverence  Heaven  and  worsliip  the  spirits.  Thereupon, 

Heaven  and  the  spirits  enriched  him,  the  feudal  lords 
befriended  him,  the  people  loved  him,  and  the  virtuous 
came  to  him.  Within  a single  generation  he  ruled  over  the 
empire  and  headed  the  feudal  lords. 

Again  in  ancient  times,  Kiug  Wen  was  assigned  to  the 
state  of  Ch’i  Ghou.  Making  allowance  for  the  irregular 
boundary  lines,  his  land  amoimted  to  about  a hundred  li 
square.  He  worked  with  his  people  for  mutual  love  and 
reciprocal  benefit.  So  those  near  him  enjoyed  his  government 
and  those  distant  submitted  themselves  to  his  virtues.  All 
who  heard  of  King  Wen  rose  up  and  rushed  over  to  him. 

The  stupid  and  insolent  and  those  weak  in  limbs  remained 
where  they  were  and  complained : Why  not  let  the  land 
of  King  Wen  extend  to  this  place.  Wouldn’t  I then  also 
be  a subject  of  King  Wen  ? ” Thereupon  Heaven  and  the  : 

spirits  enriched  him,  the  feudal  lords  befriended  him,  the  j 

people  loved  him  and  the  virtuous  came  to  him.  Within  5 

a single  generation  he  ruled  over  the  whole  empire  and  headed  | 

the  feudal  lords.  As  we  have  said:  When  the  righteous  , 

are  in  authority  the  world  will  have  order,  God,  hills  and  rivers,  i 

and  the  spirits  will  have  their  chief  sacrificer,  and  the  people  ^ 

will  be  visited  by  the  great  benefits  therefrom.  And  this  ! 

is  how  we  know  it  to  be  so.  ' 

The  ancient  sage-kings  published  laws  and  issued  orders 
to  be  standards  of  reward  and  punishment,  and  to  encourage 
the  virtuous  and  to  obstruct  the  evil.  And  so  the  people  were 
filial  to  their  parents  at  home  and  respectful  to  the  elders  ^ 

in  the  village  or  the  district.  They  observed  propriety  in 
conduct,  moderation  in  going  out  and  coming  in,  and  decency 


186 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


between  men  and  women.  And  when  they  were  made  to 
look  after  the  court  they  would  not  steal,  when  they  were 
made  to  defend  a city  they  would  not  raise  an  insurrection. 
When  the  lord  met  with  death  they  would  commit  suicide, 
and  when  the  lord  was  banished  they  would  follow  him. 
This  is  what  the  superior  will  reward  and  what  the  people 
will  applaud.  Now,  the  fatalists  say : Whoever  is  rewarded 
by  the  superior  is  destined  to  be  rewarded.  It  is  not  because 
of  his  virtue  that  he  is  rewarded.’’  Under  these  conditions 
the  people  would  not  be  filial  to  their  parents  at  home,  and 
respectful  to  the  elders  in  the  village  or  the  district.  They 
would  not  observe  propriety  in  conduct,  moderation  in  going 
out  and  coming  in,  or  decency  between  men  and  women. 
And,  if  they  were  made  to  look  after  the  court  they  would 
steal,  if  they  were  made  to  defend  a city  they  would  raise 
an  insurrection.  If  the  lord  met  with  death  they  would 
not  commit  suicide,  and  if  the  lord  were  banished  they  would 
not  accompany  him.  This  is  what  the  superior  will  punish, 
and  what  the  people  will  condemn.  The  fatalists  say: 
‘‘Whoever  is  punished  by  the  superior  is  destined  to  be 
punished.  It  is  not  because  of  his  vice  that  he  is  punished.” 
Believing  in  this,  the  ruler  would  not  be  righteous,  the  minister 
would  not  be  loyal,  the  father  would  not  be  affectionate,  the 
son  would  not  be  filial,  the  elder  brother  would  not  be 
brotherly,  and  the  younger  brother  would  not  be  respectful. 
The  unnatural  adherence  to  this  doctrine  is  responsible  for 
pernicious  ideas  and  is  the  way  of  the  wicked. 

Now  how  do  we  know  fatalism  is  the  way  of  the  wicked  ? 
In  ancient  times,  the  miserable  people  indulged  in  drinking 
and  eating  and  were  lazy  in  their  work.  Thereupon  their 


ANTI-FATALISM  (I) 


187 


food  and  clothing  became  insufficient,  and  the  danger  of 
hunger  and  cold  was  approaching.  They  did  not  acknow- 
ledge : I was  stupid  and  insolent  and  was  not  diligent  at 
work.’"  But  they  would  say  : “ It  is  but  my  lot  to  be  poor.’’ 
The  ancient  wicked  kings  did  not  control  the  sensuality  of 
their  ears  and  eyes  and  the  passions  of  their  mind.  They 
did  not  follow  their  ancestors  and  so  they  lost  their  country 
and  ruined  their  state.  They  did  not  know  that  they  should 
confess  : I am  stupid  and  insolent  and  was  not  diligent  in 
attending  to  government.”  But  they  would  say  : It  is  but 
my  fate  to  lose  it.”  The  ‘‘  Announcement  of  Chung  Hui  ” says : 
“ I have  heard  that  the  man  of  Hsia  issued  orders,  pretending 
them  to  be  fate  of  Heaven.  God  was  displeased  and  destroyed 
his  forces.”  ^ This  tells  how  T’ang  showed  Chieh’s  belief 
in  fate  to  be  wrong,  ‘‘  The  Great  Declaration  ” says  ; 
‘‘  Chow  became  insolent  and  would  not  worship  God  and 
pushed  away  the  ancestors  and  spirits  without  oSering  them 
sacrifices.  And  he  said : ‘ Fortune  is  with  my  people,’ 
and  neglected  and  betrayed  his  duty.  Heaven  thereupon 
deserted  him  and  withdrew  its  protection.”  ^ This  tells  how 
King  Wu  showed  Chow’s  belief  in  fate  to  be  wrong. 

If  the  doctrine  of  the  fatalist  were  put  to  practice,  the 
superiors  would  not  attend  to  government  and  the  sub- 
ordinates would  not  attend  to  work.  If  the  superior  does  not 
attend  to  government,  jurisdiction  and  administration  will  be 
in  chaos.  If  the  subordinates  do  not  attend  to  work,  wealth 
will  not  be  sufficient.  Then,  there  will  not  be  wherewith 

^ Cliung  Hui  is  a minister  of  T’ang.  Th.e  text  in  Bhu  CMng  is  somewhat 
different.  Cf.  Legge,  vol.  iii,  p.  179. 

2 Supra,  p.  149,  and  note  1 same  page. 


188 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


to  provide  for  the  cakes  and  wine  to  worsliip  and  do  sacrifice 
to  God,  ghosts  and  spirits  above,  and  there  will  not  be 
wherewith  to  tranquillize  the  TOtuons  of  the  world  below  ; 
there  will  not  be  wherewith  to  entertain  the  noble  guests 
from  without,  and  there  will  not  be  wherewith  to  feed  the 
hungry,  clothe  the  cold,  and  care  for  the  aged  and  weak 
within.  Therefore  fatalism  is  not  helpful  to  Heaven  above, 
nor  to  the  spirits  in  the  middle  sphere,  nor  to  man  below. 
The  eccentric  belief  in  this  doctrine  is  responsible  for  per- 
nicious ideas  and  is  the  way  of  the  wicked. 

Therefore  Motse  said : If  the  gentlemen  in  the  world  really 
desire  to  have  the  world  rich  and  do  not  want  to  have  it 
poor,  desire  to  have  it  orderly  and  dislike  to  have  it  in  con- 
fusion, the  doctrine  of  fatalism  must  be  rejected.  It  is  a 
great  calamity  to  the  world. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 
Anti-Fatalism  (II) 

Motse  said:  To  make  any  statement  or  to  publisli  any 
doctrine,  there  must  first  be  established  some  standard  of 
judgment*  To  discuss  without  a standard  is  like  determining 
the  directions  of  sunrise  and  sunset  on  a revolving  potter’s 
wheel.  Even  skilful  artisans  could  not  get  accurate  results 
in  that  way.  Xow  that  the  truth  and  error  (of  a doctrine) 
in  the  world  is  hard  to  tell,  there  must  be  three  tests.  What 
are  the  three  tests?  They  are  the  test  of  its  basis,  the 
test  of  its  verifiability,  and  the  test  of  its  applicability.  To 
test  the  basis  of  a doctrine  we  shall  examine  the  will  of  Heaven 
and  spirits  and  the  deeds  of  the  sage-kings.  To  test  its 
verifiability  we  shall  go  to  the  books  of  the  early  kings.  As 
to  its  applicability  it  is  to  be  tested  by  its  use  in  the  administra- 
tion of  justice  and  government.  These  then  are  the  three 
tests  of  a doctrine. 

Among  the  gentlemen  of  to-day  some  think  there  is  fate, 
some  think  there  is  no  fate.  That  I am  able  to  judge  whether 
there  is  fate  or  not  is  by  the  sense  testimony  of  the  multitude. 
If  some  have  heard  it  and  some  have  seen  it  I shall  say  there 
is  fate.  If  none  has  heard  it,  if  none  has  seen  it,  I shall  say 
there  is  no  fate.  Why  not  then  let  us  inquire  into  the  sense 
testimony  of  the  people  ? From  antiquity  to  the  present, 
since  the  beginning  of  man,  has  any  seen  such  a thing  as  fate, 
or  has  heard  the  sound  of  fate  ? Of  course,  there  is  none. 
If  the  common  people  are  considered  stupid  and  their  senses 
of  hearing  and  sight  unreliable,  then  why  not  inquire  into 


190 


THE  WOBKS  OF  MOTSE 


til©  recorded  statements  of  the  feudal  lords  ? But  from 
antiquity  to  the  present,  since  the  beginmng  of^^  m has 
any  of  them  heard  the  sound  of  fate  or  seen  such  a thing 
as  fate  ? Of  course,  none  of  them  has.  Again,  why  not  let 
us  inquire  into  the  deeds  of  the  sage-kings  ? The  ancient 
kings  promoted  the  filial  sons  and  encouraged  them  to  con- 
tinue to  serve  their  parents,  and  respected  the  virtuous  and 
gentle  and  encouraged  them  to  continue  to  do  good.  They 
published  their  orders  to  instruct  (the  people),  and  made 
reward  and  pmiishment  fair  to  encourage  (the  good)  and 
obstruct  (the  evil).  In  this  way  confusion  could  be  reduced 
to  order  and  danger  could  be  converted  to  peace.  If  anyone 
doubts  this,  let  us  recall;  In  ancient  times  the  confusion 
of  Chieh  was  reduced  to  order  by  T’ang,  and  that  of  Chow  by 
King  Wu.  Now,  the  times  did  not  change  and  the  people 
did  not  alter.  Yet  when  the  superior  changed  a regime  the 
subordinates  modified  their  conduct.  Under  T’ang  and  Wu 
it  was  orderly,  but  under  Chieh  and  Chow  it  was  disorderly. 
Hence  peace  and  danger,  order  and  disorder,  all  depend  on 
the  government  of  the  superior.  How  can  it  be  said  every- 
thing is  according  to  fate  ? So,  assertions  about  there  being 
fate  are  quite  false. 

The  fatalists  tell  us : This  doctrine  has  not  been  invented 
by  us  in  a late  generation.  Such  a doctrine  has  appeared 
and  been  handed  down  since  the  Three  Dynasties.  Why 
do  you,  sir,  now  oppose  it  ? ’’  (In  answer,)  Motse  asked : 
Was  it  from  the  sages  and  good  men  of  the  Three  Dynasties 
or  from  the  wicked  and  the  vicious  of  the  Three  Dynasties 
that  the  fatalistic  doctrine  came  ? How  can  we  find  this  out  ? 
In  the  beginning  secretaries  and  ministers  were  careful  in 


ANTI-FATAJLISM  (II) 


191 


speecli  and  intelligent  in  conduct.  They  could  persuade  their 
ruler  above  and  instruct  the  people  below.  Thus  they 
obtained  reward  from  their  ruler  and  applause  from  the 
people.  And  the  fame  of  those  secretaries  and  ministers 
has  come  down  to  the  present  day.  The  whole  world  remarks  : 
''  This  is  the  result  of  endeavour.’’  And  it  will  never  say  ; ^ 
I see  fate  there.” 

On  the  other  hand,  the  wicked  kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties 
did  not  control  the  lust  of  their  ears  and  eyes  and  did  not 
restrain  the  passions  of  their  heart.  When  they  went  out 
they  indulged  in  racing,  hunting,  and  trapping.  When 
they  stayed  indoors  they  revelled  in  wine  and  music.  They 
did  not  attend  to  the  government  of  the  country  and  of  the 
people,  but  they  did  much  that  was  of  no  use.  They 
oppressed  the  people,  causing  the  subordinates  not  to  love 
their  superior.  Hence  the  country  became  empty  and  without 
any  future,  and  they  themselves  were  in  punishment  and 
disaster.  But  they  would  not  confess  and  say : I am 

stupid  and  insolent  and  poor  in  administering  the  govern- 
ment.” But  they  would  say  : It  is  but  my  fate  to  perish.” 
Even  the  miserable  people  of  the  Three  Dynasties  were  like 
this.  Within  they  could  not  well  serve  their  parents,  with- 
out they  could  not  well  serve  their  ruler.  They  disliked 
politeness  and  frugality  but  liked  licence  and  ease. 
They  indulged  in  drinking  and  eating  and  were  lazy.  The 
means  of  food  and  clothing  became  insufficient  and  they 
placed  themselves  in  danger  of  hunger  and  cold.  They  would 
not  confess  : I am  stupid  and  insolent  and  was  not  diligent 


^ The  first  part  of  the  following  sentence  seems  to  he  missing. 


192 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


at  work.”  But  they  would  say : It  is  but  my  fate  to  be 
poor.”  Such,  then,  also  were  the  miserable  people  of  the 
Three  Dynasties. 

Fatalism  has  been  glossed  over  and  taught  the  stupid 
people.  This  was  of  great  concern  to  the  sage-kings,  and 
they  put  it  down  on  the  bamboos  and  silk  and  cut  it  in  metals 
and  stone.  Among  the  books  of  the  kings,  ''The 

Announcement  of  Chung  Hui”  says : I have  heard  the 
man  of  Hsia  issue  orders,  pretending  them  to  be  fate  of 
Heaven.  God  was  displeased  and  destroyed  his  forces.”^ 
This  shows  how  King  Chieh  of  Hsia  believed;  in  fate  and  how 
both  T’ang  and  Chung  Hui  thought  it  to  be  ^ong.  Among 
the  books  of  early  kings  " The  Great  Declaration”  says: 
'^Chow  became  insolent  and  would  not  worship  God,  and 
pushed  away  the  ancestors  and  spirits  without  offering  them 
sacrifices.  And  he  said:  ‘Fortune  is  with  my  people,’ 
and  neglected  and  betrayed  his  duty.  Heaven  thereupon 
‘.deserted  him  and  withdrew  its  protection.”^  This  shows 
how  Chow  believed  in  fate  and  how  King  Wu  proclaimed 
it  to  be  wrong  with  " The  Great  Declaration  Again, 
"The  Three  Dynasties  and  Hundred  States ” ^ says:  “Do 
. not  place  too  much  faith  in  the  fate  in  Heaven.”  So  “ The 
: Three  Dynasties  and  Hundred  States  ” also  says  there  is  no 
fate.  Also  " Shao  Kung  the  same  way  discredits  the 
belief  in  fate.  It  says : “ Assuredly  there  is  no  fate  in  Heaven. 
Let  us  two  not  teach  false  doctrines.  (One’s  destiny)  does 

^ Supra,  p.  187,  and  note  1 same  page. 

* Supra,  p.  149,  and  note  1 same^age,  and  p.  187,  note  2, 

® Both  ‘‘The  Three  Dynasties  and  Hundred  States  ” and  ‘‘  Shao  Kung  " 
seem  to  he  essays  in  Shu  Ching  that  are  now  lost. 


ANTI-FATALISM  (II) 


193 


not  come  from  Heaven,  but  is  shaped  by  one’s  self.”  And 
it  is  said  in  the  odes  and  books  of  Shang  and  Hsia  : Fate  ■ 

is  born  of  the^  TO  | 

So,  then,  if  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  desire  to  distinguish 
right  and  wrong,  benefit  and  harm,  fate  of  Heaven  must  be 
strenuously  discredited.  To  hold  there  is  fate  is  the  great 
disaster  of  the  w^orld.  And  therefore  Motse  refuted  it. 

: V'  ■ ■■  :::'i 


# 


CHAPTEE  XXXVII 
Anti-Fatalism  (III) 

Motse  said : In  order  to  expound  a doctrine  ttere  must 
be  established  some  standard  of  judgment.  To  expound 
without  a standard  is  similar  to  determining  the  direc- 
tions of  sunrise  and  sunset  on  a potter's  wheel  that  is 
turning.  I should  think  even  such  obvious  distinctions 
as  that  between  the  directions  of  sunrise  and  sunset  cannot 
be  thus  determined.  Therefore  every  doctrine  must  stand 
three  tests.  What  are  the  three  tests  ? They  are  the  test 
of  its  basis,  the  test  of  its  verifiability,  and  the  test  of  its 
applicability.  How  is  it  to  be  based  ? It  is  to  be  based 
on  the  deeds  of  the  early  sage-kings.  How  is  it  to  be  verified  ? 
It  is  to  be  verified  by  the  testimony  of  the  ears  and  eyes  of 
the  multitude.  How  is  it  to  be  applied  ? It  is  to  be  applied 
by  being  adopted  in  government  and  its  effects  on  the  people 
being  shown.  These  are  called  the  three  tests. 

When  the  ancient  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Djmasties,  Yii, 
T'ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  ruled,  they  said  : We  must  promote 
the  filial  sons  and  encourage  them  in  serving  their  parents, 
and  we  must  honour  the  virtuous  and  good  men  and  instruct 
them  in  doing  good.'’  In  this  way  they  administered  the 
government  and  published  instructions,  rewarded  the  good 
and  punished  the  evil.  It  seems,  in  this  way  the  confusion 
in  the  world  could  be  reduced  to  order,  and  the  danger  of 
the  state  could  be  transformed  into  safety.  If  this  is  doubted, 
(let  us  recall) : In  ancient  times,  the  disorder  of  Ghieh  was 
reduced  to  order  by  T’ang,  that  of  Chow  was  reduced  to 


ANTI-FATALISM  (III) 


195 


order  by  King  Wu.  Tben  tLe  times  did  not  change  nor  did 
the  people  alter.  Yet  when  the  superior  changed  regime  the 
subordinates  modified  their  conduct.  With  Chieh  and  Chow 
the  world  was  chaotic,  under  T’ang  and  Wu  it  became  orderly. 
That  the  world  became  orderly  was  due  to  the  endeavour  of 
T’ang  and  Wu.  That  the  world  was  chaotic  was  due  to  the 
sin  of  Chieh  and  Chow.  J udging  from  this,  safety  and  danger, 
order  and  chaos  all  depend  on  the  way  the  superior  conducts 
the  government.  How  can  it  be  said,  there  is  fate  ? In 
ancient  times  when  Yti,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu  ruled  the  empire, 
they  said;'' We  must  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  cold, 
give  the  weary  rest,  and  the  disturbed  peace.’’  Thus  their 
good  name  was  heard  all  over  the  world.  Can  this  be 
ascribed  to  fate  ? It  is  really  due  to  endeavour.  The 
virtuous  and  gentle  of  to-day  respect  virtue  and  pursue  the 
ways  and  means  (to  benefit  the  world).  Hence  they  are 
rewarded  by  the  rulers  above  and  praised  by  the  people 
below.  And  their  good  name  is  heard  all  over  the  world. 
Can  this  be  ascribed  to  fate  1 This  is  also  due  to  their 
endeavour. 

Now,  were  those  who  believed  in  fate  the  sages  of  the 
Three  Dynasties  or  the  wicked  of  the  Three  Dynasties  ? 
Judging  from  the  nature  of  this  doctrine,  it  could  not  be 
the  sages  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  but  must  be  the  wicked 
that  believed  in  fate.  The  ancient  wicked  kings  of  the  Three 
Dynasties,  Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,  were  honoured  as  emperors 
and  possessed  the  whole  world  in  wealth.  Yet  they  could  not 
control  the  sensuality  of  their  ears  and  eyes,  but  gave  rein 
to  their  passions.  Going  out  they  would  race,  himt,  and 
trap.  Staying  indoors  they  revelled  in  wine  and  music.  They 


196 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


did  not  attend  to  tlie  government  of  the  country  and  the 
people,  but  did  much  that  was  of  no  use.  And  they  oppressed 
and  violated  the  people.  Thus  they  lost  their  ancestral 
temple.^  They  would  not  confess:  ‘'I  am  insolent  and 
stupid.  I did  not  attend  to  government  diligently/’  But 
they  would  say : It  is  but  my  fate  that  I lose  it,”  Even 
the  insolent  people  of  the  Three  Dynasties  were  like  this. 
They  could  not  well  serve  their  parents  and  their  lord. 
They  greatly  hated  politeness  and  frugahty  but  liked  licence 
and  ease.  They  indulged  in  eating  and  drinking  and  were 
lazy  at  work.  Their  means  of  clothing  and  food  became 
insufficient,  and  they  incurred  the  danger  of  hunger  and  cold. 
They  would  not  confess : “I  am  stupid  and  insolent.  I 
am  not  diligent  in  my  work.”  But  they  also  said : “ It  is 
but  my  fate  that  I am  poor.”  Thus  the  insolent  people 
of  the  Three  Dynasties  also  believed  in  fate. 

The  ancient  wicked  kings  originated  it  and  the  miserable 
people  practised  it.  It  was  shaking  the  convictions  of  the 
multitudes  and  converting  the  stupid.  And  this  was  already 
of  great  concern  to  the  ancient  sage-kings.  They  put  it  down 
on  the  bamboos  and  silk  and  cut  it  in  metal  and  stone  and 
engraved  it  on  dishes  and  cups  to  be  handed  down  to  their 
descendants.  In  what  books  are  they  embodied  ? Tsung 
Teh  ” ^ of  Yu  says : When  promises  are  not  fulfilled 
even  a subject  of  Heaven  will  not  be  protected.  When  one 
has  touched  the  evil  star,  Heaven  will  visit  him  with  its  curse. 
When  one  is  not  careful  about  one’s  conduct,  how  can  fate 

^ The  loss  of  the  ancestral  temple  is  a figure  for  the  loss  of  the  empire, 
for  it  is  the  last  thing  that  one  can  afford  to  be  captured  by  the  enemy. 

® “ Tsung  Teh  seems  to  he  a lost  essay  in  Shu  Ohiiig, 


ANTLFATALISM  (III) 


of  Heaven  protect  tim  ? ’’  The  Announcement  of  Chung 
Hui  ’’  says : ''  I have  heard  that  the  man  of  Hsia  issued 
orders,  pretending  them  to  be  fate  of  Heaven.  God  was 
displeased  and  destroyed  his  armies.’"  ^ He  made  use  of 
what  did  not  exist  as  if  it  had  existed,  and  therefore  it  was 
called  pretension.  If  he  declared  to  be  existent  what  really 
existed,  how  would  this  be  pretension  ? In  ancient  times, 
Chieh  believed  in  fate  and  acted  accordingly.  T’ang  here 
showed  it  to  be  wrong  through  ‘^The  Announcement  of 
Chung  Hui  ”,  The  Great  Declaration  ” says  : “ There- 
fore the  Prince  Regent  Pa  ^ said : ‘ Ah,  my  lords,  Heaven 
blesses  the  virtuous.  Its  way  is  clear.  Example  need  not 
be  sought  far.  It  is  in  the  King  of  Yin,  He  claimed  each 
man  had  his  own  fate,  worship  should  not  be  practised, 
sacrifices  were  of  no  avail,  and  wickedness  could  do  no  harm. 
God  withdrew  his  blessing  and  the  nine  districts  are  lost  to 
him.  God  is  not  pleased  and  is  visiting  him  with  ruin. 
Hence  it  is  that  our  Chou  (the  djmasty,  the  empire)  is  given 
by  the  Great  God." ""  ^ That  is,  Chow  believed  in  fate  and 
acted  accordingly.  King  Wu  refuted  him  in  The  Great 
Declaration"".  So,  why  not  examine  the  records  of  Yii, 
Hsia,  Shang,  and  Chou,  and  see  that  all  of  them  held  there 
is  no  fate  ? How  would  you  account  for  this  ? 

And  Motse  said : In  expounding  a doctrine  or  elaborating 
a system  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  should  not  do  it  just  to 
exercise  their  voice  and  tongue  and  practise  their  lips.  It 

^ JSupra,  p.  187,  and  note  1 same  page;  p,  192,  and  note  1 same  page. 

^ Fa  is  the  personal  name  of  King  Wu. 

® According  to  the  present  text  of  ShuGhing,  this  quotation  is  a coUection 
of  sentences  scattered  all  through  the  two  parts  of  **  The  Great  Declara- 
tion For  reference,  see  Degge,  vol.  iii,  pp.  291,  294,  295-6,  297. 


198 


THl  WORKS  OF  MOTSl 


must  aim  at  being  applied  in  tli©  government  of  the  country^ 
tlie  district,  and  the  people.  Now  the  rulers  go  to  court 
early  and  retire  late,  hearing  lawsuits  and  attending  to 
government  and  meting  out  justice  for  the  whole  day,  and 
dare  not  be  negligent.  Why  do  they  do  this  ? They 
think  diligence  will  bring  about  order,  and  negligence  chaos ; 
diligence  will  produce  safety,  and  negligence  danger.  There- 
fore they  dare  not  be  negligent.  The  ministers  and  secretaries 
exhaust  the  energy  in  there  limbs  and  stretch  the  wisdom 
of  their  minds  within  to  look  after  the  court  and  without 
to  collect  taxes  from  passes,  markets,  and  products  from 
mountains,  woods,  ponds,  and  fields  to  fill  the  treasury, 
and  dare  not  be  negligent.  Why  do  they  do  this  ? They 
think  diligence  will  procure  honour  and  negligence  dishonour  ; 
diligence  will  procure  glory  and  negligence  disgrace.  There- 
fore they  dare  not  be  negligent.  The  farmers  set  out  at 
daybreak  and  come  back  at  dusk,  diligently  sowing  seeds 
and  planting  trees  to  produce  much  soy  beans  and  millet, 
and  dare  not  be  negligent.  Why  do  they  do  this  ? They 
think  diligence  will  result  in  wealth,  and  negligence  in  poverty ; 
diligence  will  produce  plenty,  and  negligence  famine.  There- 
fore they  dare  not  be  negligent.  The  women  get  up  at  dawn 
and  retire  in  the  night,  diligently  weavmg  and  spinning  to 
produce  much  silk,  flax  linen,  and  cloth,  and  dare  not  be 
negligent.  Why  do  they  do  this  ? They  think  diligence 
will  produce  wealth  and  negligence  poverty ; diligence  will 
produce  warmth  and  negligence  cold.  Therefore  they  dare 
not  be  negligent. 

Now,  if  they  should  believe  in  fate  and  behave  accordingly, 
the  rulers  would  be  negligent  in  hearing  lawsuits  and  attending 
to  government ; the  ministers  and  secretaries  would  bo 


ANTI-FATALISM  (III) 


199 


negligent  in  attending  to  court;  the  farmers  wonld  be  ; 

negligent  in  sowing  seeds  and  planting  trees ; the  women 

would  be  negligent  in  weaving  and  spinning.  When  the  ; 

rulers  are  negligent  in  hearing  lawsuits  and  attending  to  } 

government  and  the  ministers  and  secretaries  in  attending 

to  court,  then  I should  think  the  world  would  be  in  chaos. 

When  the  farmers  are  negligent  in  sowing  seeds  and  planting 

trees  and  the  women  in  weaving  and  spinning,  then  J 

according  to  my  opinion  clothing  and  food  for  the  world  will 

be  insufficient.  As  to  the  result  of  the  application  of  the  i 

doctrine  of  fatalism  to  the  government  of  the  empire,  to  | 

worship  Heaven  and  the  spirits  above  with  it  Heaven  and  the 

spirits  will  not  be  pleased,  and  to  nurture  the  people  below 

with  it  they  will  not  be  benefited  but  will  be  demoralized  and  | 

cannot  be  employed.  And,  within,  defence  will  not  be  strong, 

and,  without,  attack  will  not  be  victorious.  And  that  for 

which  the  wicked  kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Chieh,  Chow, 

Yu,  and  Li,  lost  their  country  and  ruined  their  state  was  just  f 

this  (doctrine).  | 

Therefore  Motse  said : If  the  gentlemen  of  the  world 
really  desire  to  procure  benefits  for  the  world  and  destroy 
its  calamities  they  cannot  but  vigorously  refute  the  doctrine  ij 

of  fatalism.  For,  fatalism  was  an  invention  of  the  wicked  I 

kings  and  the  practice  of  miserable  men.  It  was  not  a 
doctrine  of  the  magnanimous.  Therefore  those  who  practise  i' 

magnanimity  and  righteousness  must  examine  it  and  V 

vigorously  refute  it.  | 

' 'I 

. ■ ^ , ■ ■■  1 
' , . , ^ '.V'/S.l'. 

1 


I 

[ 


CHAPTEE  XXXIX 
AnI’I-CoNI'TOIANISM  (II)  1 

The  Confucianist  says:  Love  among  relations  should 
depend  upon  the  degree  of  relationship,  and  honour  to  the 
virtuous  should  be  graded .2  This  is  to  advocate  a discrimina- 
tion among  the  near  and  the  distant  relations  and  among  the 
respectable  and  the  humble.  But,  according  to  his  code  of 
propriety : Mourning  for  the  death  of  the  parent  should  be 
three  years  ; for  the  -wife  or  the  eldest  son  three  years ; for 
an  uncle,  a brother,  or  one  of  the  other  sons,  a year;  and  for 
a near  relative,  five  months.  If  the  periods  are  based  on  the 
degree  of  relationship,  evidently  mourning  for  the  closer 
relative  should  be  longer  and  for  the  more  distant  shorter. 
Thus  the  wife  and  the  eldest  son  are  the  same  as  the  parents 
(in  nearness).  If  the  pmods  are  based  on  degrees  of  respect 
which  are  severally  due  then  it  means  that  the  wife  and  the 
eldest  son  are  respected  as  much  as  the  parents,  and  the 
uncles  and  brothers  are  placed  on  the  same  level  with  the 
other  sons.  What  perversity  can  be  greater  than  this  ! 

When  his  parent  dies  he  first  lets  him  lie  there  without 

1 There  are  just  two  records  of  this  discourse.  Eeoord  (I)  is  lost.  The 
statements  in  the  present  record  are  not  introduced  with  “ Motse  kid  ", 
and  the  composition  and  style  show  remarkable  variation  from  the  other 
books.  And  the  confused  dates  and  facts  of  the  historical  allusions  show 
this  chapter  to  be  written  at  a much  later  date.  It  evidently  is  not  the 
recorded  words  of  Motse.  The  master  might  have  had  the  main  ideas  but 
they  were  certainly  put  into  the  present  exaggerated  form  by  someone  else. 

“ This  Confuoian  tenet  is  found  in  The  Doctrine  of  the  Mean  * * Legge, 
vol.  i,  p.  270 : “ The  decreasing  measures  of  the  love  due  to  relatives  and 
the  steps  in  the  honour  due  to  the  worthy,  are  produced  by  the  principle 
of  propriety.’^  ^ r 


ANTI-CONFUCIAITISM  (II) 


dressing  Mm  for  burial.  He  climbs  on  tbe  roof,  looks  into 
tbe  well,  readies  into  tbe  rat  holes,  and  searches  in  the 
washing  basins  to  look  for  the  dead  man.^  Assuming  that  the 
man  still  exists  this  procedure  is  certainly  stupid.  If  he  does 
not  exist  this  insistent  search  is  the  height  of  hypocrisy. 

When  a Oonfucianist  takes  a wife,^  he  has  to  escort  her 
in  person,  dressed  in  ceremonial  garments  as  a servant. 
He  drives  the  cart  himself,  as  if  waiting  on  a revered  parent. 
The  dignity  and  solemnity  of  , the  marriage  ceremony  compare 
with  that  of  sacrifice  and  worship.  High  and  low  are  turned 
upside  down.  Father  and  mother  are  disobeyed.  Parents 
are  brought  down  to  the  level  of  the  wife  and  the  wife  is  exalted 
to  interfere  with  service  to  parents.  Can  such  conduct  be 
called  filial  ? The  Oonfucianist  tells  us : A wife  is  taken 
to  share  in  continuing  the  worship  and  sacrifice  (to  ancestors) 
and  the  son  will  attend  to  the  ancestral  temple,  therefore 
they  are  highly  regarded.'"  We  answer  him  : This  is  all  false 
representation.  For,  his  brothers  attend  to  the  ancestral 
temple  for  tens  of  years.  Yet  when  they  die  he  will  momn 
for  them  only  one  year.  The  brothers’  wives  continue  the 
worship  and  sacrifice  of  his  ancestors.  Yet,  there  is  no 
mourning  (upon  their  death)  whatsoever.  Then  the  three 
years’  mourning  for  the  death  of  his  wife  and  eldest  son  is 
evidently  not  for  the  reason  of  their  attending  to  the  ancestral 
temple  and  continuing  the  worship  and  sacrifice.  Now, 
to  be  partial  to  one’s  wife  and  son  is  already  quite  wayward. 
Yet  the  Oonfucianist  pretends  it  to  be  for  the  sake  of  the 


^ These  ceremonies  are  not  found  in  Li  Chi, 

2 This  description  is  based  on  the  “ Ceremony  of  the  Scholar’s  Wedding  ’ 


in  YiLi. 


.'h.  4-. 


' if 


* - 


■ 


yi. . ' 
y.  • f’ 


H ’ V 


i, 


202 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSl 


parents.  TMs  is  partiality  to  the  most  favourite  but  neglect 
of  the  most  important.  Isn’t  this  great  perversity  ? 

Further,  he  holds  tenaciously  to  the  dogma  of  fate  and 
argues : ''  Old  age  or  early  death,  poverty  or  wealth,  safety 
or  danger,  order  or  chaos  are  destined  by  the  fate  of  Heaven 
and  cannot  be  modified.  Failure  or  success,  reward  or 
punishment,  luck  or  adversity,  are  all  settled ; the  wisdom 
and  power  of  man  can  do  nothing.”  When  the  different 
officers  believe  this  they  will  neglect  their  several  duties. 
When  the  common  people  believe  this  they  will  neglect 
their  work.  Lax  government  will  lead  to  disorder ; inefficient 
agriculture  will  lead  to  poverty.  And  poverty  is  the  root 
of  disorder  and  insurrections.  Yet  the  Confucianists 
take  this  teaching  about  fate  to  be  the  Tao  and 
the  principle  of  life.  This  is  to  destroy  the  people  of  the 
empire. 

Moreover,  the  Confucianist  glosses  over  the  elaborate 
ceremonials  and  music  to  make  man  extravagant ; he  extends 
mourning  and  pretends  grief  to  cheat  his  parents.  He 
introduces  fate  and  causes  poverty,  and  lives  in  idleness. 
He  overthrows  the  fundamentals  and  avoids  work,  and  is 
indolent  and  proud.  Self-indulgent  in  drinking  and  eating 
and  too  lazy  to  work,  he  often  suffers  from  hunger  and  cold 
and  is  in  danger  of  freezing  and  starvation,  without  ability 
to  avert  them.  He  behaves  like  a beggar  ; grasps  food  like 
a hamster,  gazes  at  things  like  a he~goat,  and  rises  up  like 
a wild  boar.  The  gentlemen  all  laugh  at  him.  He  becomes 
angry  and  exclaims:  ''What  does  the  undisciplined  man 
know  about  the  good  Confucianist  ? ” In  spring  and  summer 
he  begs  for  grains.  When  the  five  grains  are  all  gathered  in 


ANTI-CONFUCIANISM  (II) 


203 


hie  resorts  to  tiie  funerals.^  All  the  sons  and  grandsons  are 
taken  along  and  are  filled  with  drink  and  food.  It  is  sufficient 
for  him  to  manage  but  a few  funerals.  He  depends  on  otliers’ 
houses  for  Ms  wealth  and  uses  others’  fields  to  uphold  his 
dignity.  When  a death  takes  place  in  a rich  family  he  will 
rejoice  greatly,  for  it  is  Ms  opportunity  for  clothing  and 
food. 

The  Confiicianist  says : The  superior  man  must  be 

ancient  in  mode  of  speech  and  in  dress  before  he  can  be 
magnanimous.”  We  answer  him:  The  so-called  ancient 
speech  and  dress  were  all  modern  once.  W'hen  the  ancients 
first  used  that  speech  and  wore  that  dress  they  would  not  be 
superior  men  (according  to  the  Confucianists’  criteria). 
Do  you  therefore  mean  to  say  that  one  has  to  wear  the  dress 
of  the  non-superior  man  and  speak  the  speech  of  the  non- 
superior man  before  he  can  be  magnanimous  ? 

Again,  the  Confucianist  says : “ The  superior  man  con- 
forms to  the  old  but  does  not  make  innovations.”  ^ We 
answer  him  : In  antiquity  Yi  invented  the  bow,  Yii  invented 
armour,  Hsi  Chung  invented  vehicles,  and  Ch'iao  Ch’ui 
invented  boats.  Would  he  say,  the  tanners,  armourers, 
and  carpenters  of  to-day  are  all  superior  men,  whereas  Yi, 

^ In  the  Chinese  socio- cosmic  religion  there  is  no  priesthood.  The  whole 
nation  was  represented  by  the  Emperor  at  the  periodical  sacrifices  to 
Heaven,  Earth,  and  the  other  gods  and  spirits.  Marriage  and  funeral  cere- 
monies, however,  are  not  without  religious  sanctity  and  significance,  and 
these  occasions  are  usually  dignified  by  the  presence  of  some  official  or 
scholar.  The  charge  here  made  against  the  Confucianist  seems  to  be  a 
caricature  of  this  practice. 

2 Of.  Confucian  Analects,  Book  VII,  Legge,  vol.  i,  p.  69,  The  master 
said  : ‘ A transmitter  and  not  a maker,  believing  in  and  loving  the  ancients, 
I venture  to  compare  myself  with  our  old  Pang.’  ” 


204 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


Yii,  Hsi  Chung,  and  Oh’iao  Ts’iii  were  ail  ordinary  men  ? 
Moreover,  some  of  those  whom  he  follows-  must  have  been 
inventors.  Then  his  instructions  are  after  all  the  ways  of 
the  ordinary  men. 

Again  he  says : When  the  superior  man  is  victorious 
he  does  not  pursue  the  fleeing  enemy.  When  the  enemy  is 
kept  at  bay  he  does  not  shoot.  When  the  enemy  retreat 
he  will  help  them  pushing  their  carts.’’  We  answer  him: 
If  the  magnanimous  are  here  referred  to,  they  have  no  occasion 
for  strife.  The  magnanimous  remind  each  other  of  the 
principle  of  right  and  wrong  and  of  what  is  to  be  accepted 
and  what  is  to  be  rejected.  He  who  has  no  cause  follows 
him  who  has  it.  He  who  has  no  knowledge  follows  him  who 
has  knowledge.  Eunning  short  of  argument  he  would 
acknowledge  defeat,  seeing  good  he  would  be  converted. 
How  can  there  be  any  strife  ? If  the  contestants  are  both 
wicked,  though  the  victor  does  not  pursue  the  fleeing  enemy, 
though  he  does  not  shoot  the  enemy  at  bay,  though  he  helps 
pushing  the  enemy’s  carts  in  retreat — ^though  he  does  all 
these,  still  he  cannot  be  a superior  man.  On  the  other  hand, 
suppose  a sage  starts  out  to  destroy  a curse  on  behalf  of  the 
empire.  He  raises  an  army  to  punish  the  wicked  and  cruel 
state.  When  he  is  victorious,  let  us  suppose  him  to  follow 
the  Confucian  way  and  command  his  army  : ''  Don’t  pursue 
the  fleeing  enemy.  Don’t  shoot  when  the  enemy  is  at  bay. 
Help  them  pushing  the  carts  when  they  retreat.”  The 
wicked  men  will  thus  he  set  free  and  the  curse  of  the  world 
will  not  yet  be  removed.  This  is  to  harm  the  parents  of  the 
multitudes  and  greatly  to  ruin  the  world.  Nothing  can  be 
more  unrighteous ! 


ANTI-CONFUCIANISM  (II) 


205 


Again  the  Confucianist  says : ''  The  superior  man  is  like 
a bell.  It  will  sound  when  it  is  struck.  It  will  remain  silent 
when  it  is  not  struck.'’  We  answer  him : The  magnanimous,  in 
serving  his  superior,  should  be  loyal,  and  in  serving  his  parents, 
should  be  filial.  When  there  is  excellence  (in  the  superior) 
he  should  adore,  when  there  is  fault  he  should  give  counsel. 
This  is  the  way  of  a minister.  Now,  if  one  sounds  only  when 
struck,  and  remains  silent  when  not  struck,  then  he  will  hide 
his  Imowledge  and  spare  his  efforts,  waiting  to  be  questioned 
before  he  answers.  Even  if  there  is  some  great  advantage 
at  stake  to  the  lord  or  parents,  he  will  not  speak  up  without 
being  asked.  And,  if  a great  invasion  or  insurrection  is 
approaching  or  a conspiracy  is  afoot,  and  none  know  it  but 
he  ; yet  even  in  the  presence  of  his  lord  and  parents  he  will 
not  speak  up  without  being  questioned.  What  a criminal, 
producing  confusion ! Such  a man  will  not  be  loyal  as  a 
minister,  filial  as  a son,  respectful  in  serving  an  elder  brother 
or  gentle  in  treating  the  people. 

When  benefit  is  in  sight,  the  only  fear  should  be  that 
counsel  may  be  late.  When  the  ruler  starts  something 
not  beneficial,  one  should  fold  his  hands  high  on  the  breast 
and  look  down  and  utter  with  difficulty ; “ This  I have  not 
learned."  Upon  emergency  one  should  withdraw  and  set 
out  on  a long  journey.^  For,  every  principle,  doctrine,  and 
standard  of  magnanimity  and  righteousness  are  to  be  used  on 
the  large  scale  to  rule  men  and  on  the  small  scale  to  hold 
office  ; widely,  to  exercise  a universal  influence  and,  narrowly, 
to  cultivate  one's  person.  What  is  not  righteous  should 

^ The  text  of  the  last  two  sentences  is  very  faulty.  This  interpretation 
is  correct  in  principle. 


206 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

not  be  tolerated ; what  is  not  according  to  principle  should 
not  be  practised:  One  should  endeavour  to  procure  benefits 
for  the  empire  directly  and  indireGtly,  avoiding  that  which 
brings  no  profit : such  is  the  w^ay  of  the  superior  man.  But 
what  we  hear  of  the  conduct  of  K’ung  Mo  ^ is  diametrically 
opposed  to  this. 

Lord  Ghing  of  Ohl  asked  Yentse  : What  kind  of  a man 
is  Confucius  ? Yentse  answered  not.  The  Lord  reiterated 
the  question  and  there  was  still  no  answer.  Lord  Ghing 
said  : Many  have  told  me  about  K’ung  Mo  and  all  said  he 
was  a virtuous  man.  Now  that  I am  asking  you  about  him,  why 
should  you  not  answer  ? Yentse  replied : ''  Ying  ^ is  not  wise 
and  cannot  know  virtuous  men.  Yet  Ying  has  heard  that  a 
virtuous  man  must  be  one  who,  upon  entering  a state,  will 
endeavour  to  bring  about  friendly  relations  between  the 
ruler  and  the  ministers  and  dissolve  the  grudges  between 
superior  and  subordinates.  This  man  Confucius  once  visited 
the  state  of  Ghing.  He  heard  of  the  plans  of  Duke  Po  and 
told  them  to  Shih  Ch’i.  As  a result,  the  lord  almost  perished 
and  Duke  Po  was  executed.^  Ying  has  also  heard  that  the 
virtuous  man  does  not  obtain  confidence  of  the  superior  by 
flattery  or  that  of  the  subordinates  by  threat.  If  his  counsels 
are  listened  to  by  the  lord  they  will  benefit  the  people,  if  his 
instructions  are  followed  by  the  subordinates  they  will 

^ Tile  family  name  of  Confucius  is  K’ung,  and  his  own  name  is  Chiu. 
But  the  sage  has  become  too  great  to  be  called  by  name,  and  so  his  own  name 
was  changed  to  Mo,  meaning  “ somebody  Confucius  is  a Latinized 
transliteration  of  K’ung  Fu  Tse,  meaning  K’ung  the  revered  teacher. 

* Ying  is  the  “ first  name  ” of  Yentse.  Yen  is  his  “ last  name  ”. 

® This  historical  incident  happened  long  after  Yen  Ying’s  time.  It  must 
have  been  wrongly  put  into  his  mouth  by  the  author.  The  account  is  very 
much  distorted  at  the  expense  of  Confucius,  too. 


ANTI-CONFUCIANISM  (II) 


207 


benefit  tlie  superior.  His  speech  is  plain  and  easy  to  under- 
stand and  his  conduct  is  plain  and  easy  to  follow.  His 
righteous  conduct  enlightens  the  people  and  his  thoughtful 
counsel  convinces  the  lord  and  his  ministers.  Now,  this  man 
Confucius  with  elaborate  plans  conspired  with  the  rebels 
and  with  devious  plots  committed  depravity.  To  persuade 
the  subordinates  to  plot  against  their  superior  and  tell  the 
ministers  to  assassinate  their  lord  is  not  the  conduct  of  a 
virtuous  man.  To  enter  a country  and  join  with  its  traitors 
is  not  akin  to  the  righteous.  To  urge  those  who  are  known 
to  be  disloyal  to  revolt  does  not  fit  the  way  of  the 
magnanimous.  Plotting  against  one  at  a distance  and 
condemning  one  behind  his  back,  his  conduct  enlightening 
not  the  people  and  his  counsel  convincing  not  the  lord — ^how 
Confucius  is  different  from  Duke  Po,  your  servant  Ying 
does  not  see.  This  is  why  I did  not  answer  you.’’  Lord 
Ching  said  : Oh  ! I have  been  benefited.  If  it  were  not  for 
you,  I would  never  in  my  life  understand  K’ung  Mo  to  be  of 
the  same  kind  as  Duke  Po.” 

K’ung  Mo  visited  the  state  of  Ch’i  and  saw  Lord  Ching. 
Lord  Ching  was  pleased  and  was  going  to  assign  Ni  Hsi  ^ to 
him.  He  told  Yentse  about  it.  Yentse  said : Please 

do  not.  A scholar  of  his  school  would  sit  crouching  and  take 
things  easy,  therefore  he  cannot  be  made  to  teach  the 
subordinates.  He  likes  music  and  will  corrupt  the  people, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  trusted  to  govern.  He  believes 
in  fate  and  will  neglect  his  duty,  therefore  he  cannot  be 
given  an  office.  He  lays  emphasis  on  mourning  and  makes 
much  of  grief,  therefore  he  cannot  be  made  to  take  care  of 
1 Ni  Hsi  is  the  name  of  a place,  probably  a district. 


208  THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

the,, people.  He  will  be  formal  in  dress  and  afiected  in 
manners,  therefore  he  cannot  lead  the  multitudes.  Kmng  Mo 
dresses  elaborately  and  puts  on  adornments  to  mislead  the 
people,  promotes  music  and  dancing  to  attract  the  multitudes, 
performs  elaborate  ceremonies  of  going  up  and  coming  down 
the  steps,  and  practises  the  etiquette  of  rushing  and  soaring  ^ 
to  dazzle  the  multitudes.  With  all  his  extensive  learning 
he  cannot  plan  for  the  world  ; wit-hull  his  laborious  thought 
he  cannot  help  the  people.  A whole  lifetime  cannot  exhaust 
his  learning ; the  grown  man  cannot  observe  his  ceremonies ; 
and  even  the  wealthy  cannot  enjoy  his  music.  He  elaborates 
and  adorns  his  improper  ways  to  keep  the  lords  busy ; he 
profusely  furnishes  sounds  and  music  to  corrupt  the  people. 
His  principles  cannot  instruct  the  world  ; his  learning  cannot 
lead  the  multitudes.  Now  you,  my  lord,  commission  him  to 
change  the  customs  of  Ch’i.  It  really  is  not  the  way  to  lead 
a country  and  bring  forward  the  multitudes.’’  The  Lord 
said : This  is  well.” 

Thereupon  the  Lord  gave  him  valuable  gifts  but  retained 
the  commission,  received  him  with  respect  but  did  not  inquire 
into  his  teaching.  K’ung  Mo  became  angry,  angry  with 
Lord  Ching  and  Yentse.  So,  he  placed  Ch’ih  Yi  Tse  P’i  in 
the  following  of  Then  Ch’ang,^  and  communicated  his  plans 
to  Huitse  ^ of  the  South  City.  Then  he  returned  to  Lu. 
Before  long,  Ch’i  desired  to  attack  Lu.  He  remarked  to 


^ A ceremonious  movement  of  the  body  during  which  the  arms  are  so 
placed  as  to  imitate  the  wings  of  a bird. 

® T'ien  Ch’ang  is  a general  of  Chi. 

* Huitse  is  a follower  of  T’ien  Ch*ang, 


ANTI-CONFUCIANISM  (II)  ' 209 


Tse  Kiing^:  ''  Oh,  Ts’e^!  now  is  the  time  to  do  the  great 
deed/'  Thereupon  he  sent  Tse  Kung  to  Ch'i  and,  through 
the  introduction  of  Huitse  of  the  South  City,'  saw,'  Then 
Ch'ang.  Tse  Kmig  persuaded  him  td  attack  Wu  .(instead 
•of  Lu).  He  also  told  Kao  Kuo  Pao  Yen^  not  to  interfere 
with  Then  Ch'ang's  insurrection.  Then  he  went  , "on  and 
persuaded  Yiieh  to  attack  Wu.  For  three  years,  both 
Chh  and  Wu  were  threatened  with  ruin.  The  bodies  of  those 
killed  amounted  to  hundreds  of  thousands.  And  this  was 
the  revenge  of  K'ung  Mo,^ 

K'ung  Mo  was  once 'the  Chief  Justice  of  Lu.  But  he 
abandoned  the  cause  of  the  lord  and  entered  the  service  of 
Chi  Sun.^  Chi  Sun  was  the  Chancellor  of  Lu  but  deserted 
his  trust  and  ran  away.^  As  he  was  trying  to  force  the  gate 
against  the  guards,  K'ung  Mo  lifted  the  beam  (for  him). 

Once,  K'ung  Mo  was  in  straits  between  Ts’ai  and  Ch'en  ^ 
having  only  vegetable  soup  without  even  rice  to  eat.  After 
ten  days  of  this,  Tse  Lu  ^ cooked  a pig  for  him.  K'ung  Mo 
did  not  inquire  whence  the  meat  came,  and  ate.  Tse  Lu 

^ Tse  Kung  is  one  of  the  seventy-two  best  disciples  of  Confucius,  and  is 
one  of  the  best  known  to  the  later  generations.  Ts’e  is  the  personal  name 
of  Tse  Kung,  just  as  Ying  is  that  of  Yentse. 

2 Kao  Kuo  Pao  Yen  is  another  general  of  Ch'i. 

® According  to  any  historical  record  this  charge  is  quite  false. 

* Chi  Sun  is  the  head  of  a powerful  family  in  the  state  of  Lu. 

® This  charge  is  again  unfounded. 

® Mention  of  this  incident  in  Confucius'  life  is  made  in  the  Analects, 
Book  XV,  Legge,  voL  i,  p.  158 ; “ When  he  was  in  Chen  their  provisions 
were  exhausted,  and  his  followers  became  so  ill  that  they  were  unable  to 
rise/' 

’ Tse  Lu  is  another  of  the  seventy-two  best  disciples  of  Confucius.  He, 
like  Peter  in  the  Christian  Apostolic  circle,  is  noted  for  courage  and  straight- 
forwardness. 


p 


210 


THE  WQEKS  OF  MOTSl 


robbed  some  one  of  Ms  garment  and  exclianged  it  for  wine. 
K’ung  Mo  did  not  inquire  whence  the  wine  came,  and  drank. 
But  when  Lord  Ai  received  Confucius,  Confucius  woMd  not 
sit  on  a mat  that  was  not  placed  straight  and  would  not  eat 
meat  that  was  not  cut  properly.^  Tse  Lu  went  to  him  and 
asked  : Why  the  reverse  to  what  you  did  on  the  borders 
of  CMen  and  Ts’ai?’’  E’ung  Mo  answered:  ''Come, 
let  me  tell  you.  Then,  our  goal  was  to  keep  alive.  Now  our 
goal  is  to  behave  righteously/’  Now  when  hunger-stricken 
he  was  not  scrupulous  about  the  means  of  keeping  alive, 
and  when  satiated  he  acted  hypocritically  to  appear  refined. 
What  foolery,  perversion,  villainy,  and  pretension  can  be 
greater  than  this ! 

K’ung  Mo  was  lounging  with  his  disciples.  He  remarked  : 
" When  Shun  saw  Ku  Sou  ^ he  felt  uneasy.  The  empire  at 
the  time  must  be  in  danger.  Was  not  Tan,  the  Duke  of  Chou, 
unmagnanimous  ? WTiy  did  he  resign  from  his  public  office 
and  retire  to  his  private  home  ? ” ® This  shows  K’ung  Mo’s 
conduct  and  the  attitude  of  his  mind. 

His  followers  and  disciples  all  imitated  him ; Tse  Kung 
and  Chi  Lu  ^ assisted  K’ung  Li  ^ and  committed  high  treason 
against  the  state  of  Wei.  Yang  Huo  rebelled  against  Ch’i. 

1 Tkese  details  occur  also  in  tlie  Analects,  Book  X,  in  the  form  of  Confucian 
precepts.  Of.  Legge,  voL  i,  pp.  96,  97. 

® Ku  Sou  is  the  name  of  Shun's  blind  father. 

® These  two  slighting  remarks  directed  against  Shun  and  Duke  Chou 
would,  indeed,  constitute  an  indefensible  charge  against  their  author.  But 
that  Confucius  has  made  them  is  most  improbable. 

* Chi  Lu  is  the  name  of  Tse  Lu  just  as  Mo  Ti  is  the  name  of  Motse. 

* K*ung  Li  is  a rebel  of  the  state  of  Wei.  Ail  the  other  personal  names 
occurring  in  this  paragraph  are  names  of  men  of  the  Confucian  school. 


ANTI-CONFUCIANISM  (II) 


211 


Fei  Kan  was  entrusted  with  Chung  Mou  and  became 
independent.  Ch’iTiao  had  a ferocious  appearance.  Nothing 
can  be  more ^ ...  than  this!  Of  course  the  disciples  and 
pupils,  following  a teacher,  will  advocate  his  doctrines  and 
imitate  his  conduct.  Only,  they  are  not  as  powerful  and  not 
as  clever.  Now,  since  such  was  the  conduct  of  K’lmg  Mo, 
the  Confuoian  scholars  are  naturally  to  be  objects  of  suspicion. 

^ A word  or  a phrase  deprecatory  in  nature  following  this  seems  to 


BOOK  XI 
CHAPTEE  XLVI 
Kenc  Chu,^ 

Motse  was  angry  with  Keng  Chntse.  Keng  Clmtse  said : 
“ Am  I not  at  all  better  than  others  ? ’’  Motse  said  ; Suppose 
I am  starting  out  for  T'ai  Hang.^  And  a horse  and  an  ox 
are  to  pull  my  cart.  Which  of  them  would  you  urge  ? Keng 
Chntse  said : I would  urge  the  horse.’’  Motse  asked : 
Why  urge  the  horse  ? Keng  Chutse  said : Because  the 
horse  is  capable  (of  better  speed).”  Motse  said:  I also 
think  you  are  capable  (of  better  things). 

Wu  Matse  ^ questioned  Motse : ‘‘  Which  are  wiser,  the 
ghosts  and  spirits  or  the  sages  ? ” Motse  said : The  ghosts 
and  spirits  are  wiser  than  the  sages  by  as  much  as  the  sharp- 
eared  and  keen-sighted  surpass  the  deaf  and  blind.  In 
ancient  times,  Emperor  Chi  ^ of  Hsia  commissioned  Fei  Lien 
to  dig  minerals  in  mountains  and  rivers  and  cast  tings  ® 
at  K*un  Wu.  He  ordered  Yi  to  kill  the  pheasant  to  invoke 
the  tortoise  of  Po  Jo,®  saying  : Let  the  tings,  when  com- 
pleted, be  four-legged.  Let  them  be  able  to  cook  auto- 
matically, without  fire,  to  hide  themselves  without  being 

^ Keng  Chu  or  Keng  Clmtse  is  the  name  of  a disciple  of  Motse. 

^ T'ai  Hang  is  a mountain  in  what  is  now  Honan  ProTince. 

® Wu  Matse  might  be  Wu  Ma  Ch'i,  who  was  a disciple  of  Confucius.  But 
it  is  more  likely  that  this  is  his  son. 

* Ch'i  is  the  second  Emperor  of  the  Dynasty  of  Hsia,  son  of  Yii.  But  the 
story  about  the  nine  tings  is  generally  attributed  to  Yu  and  not  to  Ghl. 

® Tings  are  tripod-like  sacrificial  vessels. 

® Po  Jo  seems  here  to  be  a proper  name,  name  of  a place.  But  com- 
mentators differ  on  this  point,  Cf.  Eorke,  Mi  Ti,  p.  537. 


KENG  (Jm 


213 


lifted,  and  to  move  themselves  witt^  being  carried.  So 
that  they  may  be  used  for  the  sacrifice  at  K'un  Wu.  May 
our  ofiering  be  accepted  ! Then  the  oracle  was  interpreted 
as  saying  : ''I  have  accepted  the  offering.  Profuse  are  the 
white  clouds  : one  to  the  south,  one  to  the  north,  one  to  the 
west,  one  to  the  east.  When  the  nine  tings  have  been 
completed,  they  shall  be  given  over  to  three  empires.  When 
the  emperor  of  Hsia  loses  them  the  man  of  Yin  will  possess 
them  *,  when  the  man  of  Yin  loses  them  the  man  of  Chou 
will  possess  them.’’  Now  the  transfer  from  the  emperor  of 
Hsia  to  Yin  and  Chou  took  many  centuries.  Even  if  the  sage 
planned  in  counsel  with  his  excellent  ministers  and  superior 
assistants,  could  he  foresee  what  would  happen  after  many 
centuries  ? Yet  the  ghosts  and  spirits  can.  Therefore  we 
say,  the  ghosts  and  spirits  are  wiser  than  the  sages  by  as  much 
as  the  sharp-eared  and  keen-sighted  are  than  the  deaf  and 
blind. 

Chih  T'u  Yii  and  Hsien  Tse  Shih  ^ asked  Motse  : ‘‘  What  is 
the  greatest  righteousness  in  conduct  ? ” Motse  said : It  is 
like  the  building  of  a wall.  Let  those  who  can  lay  the  bricks 
lay  the  bricks,  let  those  who  can  fill  in  the  mortar  fill  in  the 
mortar,  and  let  those  who  can  carry  up  the  material  carry 
up  the  material.  Then  the  wall  can  be  completed.  To  do 
righteousness  is  just  like  this.  Let  those  who  can  argue 
argue,  let  those  who  can  expound  the  doctrines  expound 
the  doctrines,  and  let  those  who  can  administer,  administer. 
Then  righteousness  is  achieved. 

Wu  Matse  said  to  Motse  : Though  you  love  universally 
the  world  cannot  be  said  to  be  benefited ; though  I do  not 
^ Chiii  Tu  Yu  and  Hsien  Tse  Sliih  are  two  of  Motse*s  disciples. 


214 


THE  WORKS  ^ : OF :: -MOTSE 


love  (universally)  tko  world , cannot  be  said  to  bo  injured. 
Since  neither  of  us  has : accomplished'  anything^  what' :mahes ' 
you  then  praise  yourself  and  blame  me  ? Motse  answered : 
Suppose  a conflagration  is  on.  One  person  is  fetching  water 
to  extinguish  it,  and  another  is  holding  some  fuel  to  reiEforee 
it.  Neither  of  them  has  yet  accomplished  anything,  but  which 
one  do  you  value  ? Wu  Matse  answered  that  he  - approved  of 
the  intention  of  the  person  who  fetches  water  and  disapproved 
of  the  intention  of  the  person  who  holds  fuel.  Motse  said : 
(In  the  same  manner,)  do  I approve  of  my  intention  and 
disapprove  of  yours. 

Motse  had  recommended  Keng  Ohutse  to  Ch'u.  Some 
(other)  pupils  visited  him.  They  were  given  only  three 
sheng^  (of  grain)  each  meal  and  were  not  generously  enter- 
tained. The  pupils  returned  and  reported  to  Motse,  saying : 

Keng  Ohutse  is  not  profited  by  serving  Ch'u.  When  we 
visited  him,  we  were  given  only  three  sheng  each  meal  and 
were  not  generously  entertained.”  Motse  said  : You  cannot 
tell.  Shortly  after,  (Keng  Ohutse)  sent  Motse  ten  chin^ 
of  silver,  saying : “ Your  junior  disciple  who  dare  not  die  ^ 
sends  herewith  ten  chin,  which  I hope  you  will  use.”  Motse 
said : So,  indeed,  we  cannot  tell. 

Wu  Matse  said  to  Motse : For  all  the  righteousness  that 
you  do,  men  do  not  help  you  and  ghosts  do  not  bless  you. 
Yet  you  keep  on  doing  it.  You  must  be  demented.”  Motse 

^ A sheng  ^ now  is  about  a pint.  But  it  was  smaller  then,  perhaps  only 
i or  -iV  as  large. 

^ 1 chin  ^ = 20  taels,  about  27  oz. 

® The  gist  of  the  meaning  of  this  peculiar  salutation  is  that  he  feels  he  has 
been  unfilial  enough  to  deserve  death. 


KENG  CHU 


216 


said : Suppose  you  kave  here  two  employees.  One  of  them 
works  wken  lie  sees  you  but  will  not  work  when  he  does  not  see 
you.  The  other  one  works  whether  he  sees  you  or  not. 
Which  of  the  two  would  you  value  ?■  Wu  Matse  said  that 
he  would  value  him  that  worked  whether  he  saw  him  or  not. 
Motse  then  said : Then  you  are  valuing  him  who  is  demented. 

A pupil  of  Tse  Hsia  ^ asked  Motse  whether  there  could  be 
any  struggle  among  the  superior  men.  Motse  said:  The 
superior  men  do  not  struggle.  The  pupil  of  Tse  Hsia  said  : 

There  is  struggle  even  among  the  dogs  and  hogs,  how  can 
there  be  no  struggle  among  men  ? ’’  Motse  said : What 
a shame ! T'ang  and  Wu  are  praised  with  words ; hut 
dogs  and  hogs  are  brought  into  comparison  in  conduct. 
What  a shame ! 

Wu  Matse  criticized  Motse,  saying : To  leave  con- 

temporaries alone  and  to  praise  the  early  kings  is  to  praise 
rotten  bones.  It  is  like  the  carpenter  who  knows  only  the 
decaying  lumber  but  not  the  living  tree.”  Motse  said : 
Now  the  world  lives  because  of  the  instructions  of  the  early 
kings.  And  to  praise  the  early  kings  is  to  praise  the  source 
of  life  to  the  world.  Not  to  praise  what  should  be  praised 
is  not  magnanimous. 

Motse  said : The  jade  of  Ho,  the  pearl  of  Duke  Sui,  and  the 
nine  tings — ^these  are  what  the  feudal  lords  value  as  excellent 
treasures.  Can  they  enrich  the  country,  multiply  the  people, 
put  the  government  in  order,  and  place  the  state  in  safety  ? 
Of  course  they  cannot.  Excellent  treasures  are  to  be  valued 
for  their  efficacy.  Now  since  the  jade  of  Ho,  the  pearl  of 
Duke  Sui,  and  the  nine  tings  cannot  benefit  men,  then  they 
^ Tse  Hsia  is  a Confucian  disciple. 


216 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


are  not  the  excellent  treasures  in  the  world.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  righteousness  is  employed  in  the  government  of  the 

state  the  population  will  be  increased,  the  government 

will  be  in  order,  and  the  state  will  be  secure.  The  excellent 
treasures  are  to  be  valued  for  their  efficacy.  ISTow  righteous- 
ness can  benefit  men.  So  then  righteousness  is  the  excellent 
treasure  of  the  world. 

Lord  Tse  Kao  of  Sheh  asked  Chung  Ni  ^ about  government, 
saying : “ What  is  a good  governor  like  ? ” Chung  Ni 
answered  him  that  the  good  governor  will  attract  those  who 
are  distant  and  renew  old  friendships.^  Motse  heard  of  it 
and  commented:  Lord  Tse  Kao  of  Sheh  did  not  put  the 
question  right,  neither  did  Chung  Ni  give  the  right  answer. 
For,  did  not  Lord  Tse  Kao  of  Sheh  understand,  to  be  a good 
governor  is  to  attract  the  distant  and  to  renew  the  old  friend- 
ships ? The  question  was  really  how  to  do  this.  The  answer 
told  only  what  the  inquirer  understands  but  did  not  tell 
what  he  does  not  understand.  Therefore  (I  say),  Lord 
Tse  Kao  of  Sheh  did  not  put  the  question  right,  neither  did 
Chung  Ni  give  the  right  answer. 

Motse  said  to  Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  « The  large  states 
attackmg  the  smaU  states  is  like  the  boys  playing  horse 
When  the  boys  play  horse,  they  merely  tire  out  their  own 

^ “ame  of  Confucius  by  wbicb  be  was 

mown  to  ins  friends.  Supra,  p.  206,  note  1. 

I differently,  recorded  in  the  AnalecU. 

of  Sheh  asked  about  government.  The 
Master  said : Go^  government  obtains  when  those  who  are  near  are 
made  happy,  and  those  who  are  far  off  are  attracted  * 

i.  a. 


KENG  GHU 


217 


feet.  Now,  wten  a large  state  attacks  a small  state  the 
farmers  of  tlie  attacked  states  cannot  cultivate  tke  fields 
and  tiio  women  cannot  weave.  They  have  to  go  to  the 
defence.  And  the  farmers  of  the  invading  states  cannot 
cultivate  the  fields  and  the  women  cannot  weave  either. 
They  have  to  take  part  in  the  attack.  Therefore  (I  say) 
the  large  states  attacking  the  small  states  is  like  the  boys 
playing  horse. 

Motse  said  : Doctrines  that  can  be  translated  into  conduct 
may  be  taught  frequently.  Doctrines  that  cannot  be  trans- 
lated into  conduct  may  not  be  taught  frequently.  To  talk 
frequently  about  what  cannot  be  carried  out  is  merely  to 
wear  out  one’s  mouth. 

Motse  sent  Kuan  Ch’in  Ao  to  recommend  Kao  Shihtse  to 
Wei.  The  lord  of  Wei  gave  him  heavy  emoluments  and 
ranked  him  among  the  ministers.  Kao  Shihtse  came  to 
court  three  times  and  gave  all  his  counsels.  But  none  of 
them  was  carried  out.  So  he  left  for  Ch’i  where  he  saw 
Motse  and  said : ''  On  your  account  the  lord  of  Wei  gave 
me  heavy  emoluments  and  ranked  me  among  the  ministers. 
I went  to  coiii’t  three  times  and  gave  all  my  counsels.  But 
none  of  them  was  carried  out.  So  I left.  Wouldn’t  the  lord 
of  Wei  think  I was  demented  ? ” Motse  said : If  you  left 
because  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  Tao,^  what  does  it  matter 
even  if  suspected  of  being  demented  ? Anciently,  Duke 
Chou  was  displeased  with  Uncle  Kuan  ^ and  resigned  from 


^ The  pregnant  word  “ Tao is  here  best  understood  perhaps  as  the 
right  way. 

® Kuan  is  uncle  of  the  reigning  Emperor  Gh'eng  and  brother  of 
Duke  Chou. 


218 


THE  WOEKS  "OF  :"MOTSl 


til©  Duke’s  duties  and  went' .east  to  Skaug  Yen  to  Hto.  Every- 
body tben  said  be  was  demented.  But  posterity  praised 
bis  virtue  and  exalted  Ms  name  unto  this  day.  Moreover, 
I bavo  beard,  to  practise  righteousness  is  not  to  avoid  blame 
and  seek  praise.-  If  tbe  resignation  is  in  a'ccordance  witb 
tbe  Tao,  wbat  does  it  matter  if  one  is  suspected  of  being 
demented  ? Kao  Sbibtse  said : “ How  dare  Sbib  leave 
if  it  were  not  in  accordance  witb  tbe  Tao  ? Formerly,  Master, 
you  have  said  : When  there  is  no  Tao  in  tbe  world,  tbe  superior 
men  will  not  stay  in  positions  of  plenty.  Now  tbe  lord  of 
Wei  does  not  observe  tbe  Tao.  If  I should  covet  Ms  emoluments 
and  position  then  I would  be  livmg  on  others  as  a parasite.” 
Motse  was  pleased  and  summoned  Cb’intse,^  teUing  him: 
Now,  listen,  cases  of  disregard  of  righteousness  for  emoluments 
I have  heard  of.  But  disregard  of  emoluments  for  righteous- 
ness I have  seen  (only)  in  Kao  SMhtse. 

Motse  said : When  a man  calls  a gentleman  of  tbe  present 
rich  while  be  is  poor  be  becomes  angry.  Yet,  when  tbe 
man  calls  Mm  just  be  will  be  pleased  even  though  be  is  unjust. 
Isn’t  this  perverse  ! 

Kung  Mengtse  ^ said : ‘‘  Tbe  ancient  people  bad  their 
rules,  and  they  were  but  three  in  number.”  Motse  interrupted 
Mm,  saying : Which  ancient  people  are  you  talking  about 
that  you  say  have  three  rules?  You  don’t  understand 
that  people  first  had  ^ . 

Some  pupils  deserted  Motse  and  then  returned.  (They  said :) 
‘‘  How  are  we  to  blame  ? We  deserted  late,”  Motse  said : 

^ Ch'intse  or  Cii’in  Hua  Li  is  tLe  leading  disciple  of  Motse. 

® Kimg  Meng  is  a Confucianist,  probably  a pnpii  of  Tsengtse, 

® The  text  here  is  incomplete.  It  is  hard  to  constrae  the  meaning  of  the 
remaining  portion. 


KENG  CHU 


219 


THs  is  like  asking  for  reward  for  late  desertion  in  a defeated 
army. 

Kung  Mengtse  said  : ''  The  superior  man  does  not  create 
but  transmits.”  ^ Motse  said : Not  at  all.  Tbe  most 
unsuperior  men  do  not  transmit  the  good  of  old  and  do  not 
create  any  good  for  the  present.  The  less  iinsuperior  men 
do  not  transmit  the  good  of  old,  but  will  bring  out  the  good 
which  he  possesses  for  the  sake  of  praise.  Now  to  transmit 
but  not  to  create  is  not  different  from  creating  without 
transmitting.  It  seems  to  me  what  good  there  is  of  old  one 
should  transmit  it ; what  good  there  is  to  be  for  the  present, 
one  should  institute  it,  so  that  the  good  may  increase  all 
the  more. 

Wu  Matse  told  Motse : I differ  from  you.  I cannot 

love  universally — I love  the  people  of  Tsou  better  than  the 
people  of  Ch’u,  the  people  of  Lu  better  than  the  people  of 
Tsou,  the  people  of  my  district  better  than  the  people  of 
Lu,  the  members  of  my  family  better  than  the  people  of 
my  district,  my  parents  better  than  the  other  members 
of  my  family,  and  myself  better  than  my  parents.  This, 
because  of  their  nearness  to  me.  When  I am  beaten  I feel 
pain.  When  they  are  beaten  the  pain  does  not  extend  to 
me.  Why  should  I resist  what  does  not  give  me  pain  but 
not  resist  what  gives  me  pain  ? Therefore  I would  rather 
have  them  killed  to  benefit  me  than  to  have  me  killed  to 
benefit  them.”  Motse  said : Is  this  view  of  yours  to  be  kept 
secret  or  to  be  told  to  others  ? Wu  Matse  replied  : Why 
should  I keep  my  opinion  to  myself  ? Of  course  I shall  tell 
it  to  others.”  Motse  said : Then  if  one  person  is  pleased 

^ Sujpra,  p.  203  and  note  2 same  page. 


220 


THE  WORKS  „ OF  MOTSE  , 

wit3i  you,^  there  will  be  one  person  who  will  desire  to  Mil 
you  in  order  to  benefit  himself.  If  ten  persons  are  pleased 
with  you,  there  will  be  ten  persons  who  will  desire  to  Mil 
you  to  benefit  themselves.  If  (the  people  of)  the  whole  world 
are  pleased  with  you,  the  whole  world  will  desire  to  kill  you  to 
benefit  themselves.  (On  the  other  hand),  if  one  person  is  not 
pleased  with  you  there  will  be  one  person  who  will  desire 
to  kill  you  as  the  propagator  of  a wicked  doctrine.  If  ten 
persons  are  not  pleased  with  you  there  wil  be  ten  persons 
who  will  desire  to  kill  you  as  the  propagator  of  an  evil  doctrine. 
If  (the  people  of)  the  whole  world  are  not  pleased  with  you 
the  whole  world  will  desire  to  kill  you  as  . the  propagator 
of  an  evil  doctrine,  (So,  then)  those  who  are  pleased  with 
you  desire  to  kill  you  and  those  who  are  not  pleased  with 
you  also  desire  to  kill  you.  This  is  to  say,  what  passes  out 
from  your  mouth  is  what  kills  your  body.  Motse  continued : 
Then,  where,  after  all,  does  the  benefit  of  your  doctrine  lie  1 
To  teach  what  is  not  profitable  is  merely  to  wear  out  one’s 
mouth. 

Motse  said  to  Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang : Here  is  a man 
who  has  such  an  abundance  of  sheep,  oxen,  and  (other) 
grass-fed  and  grain-fed  animals  that  he  cannot  eat  all  that 
the  cooks  prepare  for  him.  (Yet,)  when  he  sees  a man  baking 
cakes,  he  looks  surprised  and  steals  them,  saying : Let 
me  eat  them.”  Now,  is  this  due  to  an  unsatisfied  appetite 
or  is  he  affected  with  kleptomania  ? Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang 
replied  that  he  must  be  suffering  from  kleptomania.  Motse 
said:  The  fields  of  Ch’u  all  lie  in  waste  and  cannot  be 
exhaustively  cultivated.  The  unoccupied  land  amounts 

^ You,  meaning  your  doctrine. 


KENG  CHU 


221 


to  thousands  (of  mu)  and  is  more  than  sufficient  for  cultiva- 
tion. Yet  when  it  saw  the  towns  of  Sung  and  Cheng, 
it  looked  surprised  and  stole  them.  Is  there  any  difierence 
between  this  and  the  other  (case)  ? Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang 
replied:  '‘This  is  the  same  as  that.  It  must  be  suffering 
from  kleptomania  (too).’^ 

Motse  said : When  Chi  Sun  Shao  and  Meng  Po  Oh’ang 
were  in  authority  in  Lu  they  could  not  trust  each  other. 
So  they  took  oath  at  the  altar,  saying:  "May  we  be 
harmonious ! " This  is  like  closing  one’s  eyes  and  praying 
at  the  altar : " May  I be  able  to  see  everything  ! ” Isn’t 
this  unreason  f 

Motse  said  to  Lo  Hua  Li : I have  heard  you  are  brave. 
Lo  Hua  Li  replied : " Yes.  When  I hear  there  is  a brave 
man  somewhere  I always  go  and  kill  him.”  Motse  said : 
The  whole  world  promotes  that  which  it  likes  and  destroys 
that  which  it  hates.  But  when  you  hear  of  a brave  man 
somewhere  you  must  go  and  kill  him.  This  is  not  admiration  ^ 
for  bravery  but  hate  for  it. 

1 Th,ere  is  a pun  in  tlie  Giiinese  text  of  this  paragraph  that  is  impossible 
to  bring  out  in  English.  When  Motse  said  to  the  man  “ I have  heard  you 
are  brave*',  the  Chinese  words  used  also  mean  I have  heard,  you 
admire  bravery  " ^ 


BOOK  XII 

CHAPTEE  XLVII 
Esteem  foe  Eighteotjsness 

Motse  said : Of  tte  multitude  of  things  none  is  more 
valuable  than  righteousness.  Suppose  we  say  to  a person : 
We  shall  give  you  a hat  and  shoes  on  condition  you  let  us 
cut  off  your  hands  and  feet.  Would  he  agree  to  this  ? Of 
course,  he  will  not  agree.  Why  ? Just  because  hats  and 
shoes  are  not  so  valuable  as  hands  and  feet.  Again  (if  we 
say),  we  shall  give  you  the  whole  world  on  condition  you  let 
us  kill  you.  Would  he  agree  to  this  ? Of  course  he  will 
not  agree.  Why  ? Just  because  the  world  is  not  so  valuable 
as  one’s  person.  Yet  people  have  struggled  against  one 
another  for  a single  principle.  This  shows  righteousness 
is  even  more  valuable  than  one’s  person.  Hence  we  say, 
of  the  multitude  of  things  none  is  more  valuable  than 
righteousness. 

On  his  way  from  Lu  to  Ch’i,  Motse  met  an  old  friend  who 
said  to  him : Nowadays  none  in  the  world  practises  any 
righteousness.  You  are  merely  inflicting  pain  on  yourself 
by  trying  to  practise  righteousness.  You  had  better  give 
it  up.”  Motse  replied : Suppose  a man  has  ten  sons.  Only 
one  attends  to  the  farm  while  the  other  nine  stay  at  home. 
Then  the  farmer  must  work  all  the  more  vigorously.  Why  ? 
Because  many  eat  while  few  work.  Now,  none  in  the  world 
practises  righteousness.  Then  you  should  all  the  more 
encourage  me.  Why  do  you  stop  me  ? 


ESTEEM  FOR  RIGHTEOUSNESS 


Motso  travelled  soatli  to  Cli’ii  to  see  Lord  Hiii  of  Cli’u. 
Lord  Hiii  refused  to  see  Lim  witL  the  excuse  of  Ms  being  old, 
and  let  Mu  Ho  receive  Mm.  Motse  talked  to  Mu  Ho  and 
Mu  Ho  was  greatly  pleased.  He  said  to  Motse : ''  Your 
idea  may  be  quite  good.  But  our  Lord  is  a great  Lord  of  the 
empire.  Can’t  lie  refuse  to  employ  tbem  because  they  come 
only  from  a bumble  man  ? ’’  Motse  replied : So  long  as  they 
are  applicable  they  are  like  (good)  medicines,  wMcb  are  only 
tbe  roots  of  kerbs.  Yet  even  tbe  emperor  takes  them  to 
cure  bis  sickness.  Does  be  refuse  to  take  them  because  they 
are  only  tbe  roots  of  a herb  ? Now,  tbe  farmer  pays  bis  tax 
to  tbe  superior.  (With  this,)  tbe  superior  prepares  wine 
and  cakes  to  do  sacrifice  to  God,  ghosts  and  spirits.  Do  these 
refuse  to  accept  them  because  they  come  from  tbe  bumble  ? 
So,  even  a bumble  man  can  yet  be  compared  to  tbe  farmer, 
or,  at  least  to  medicine.  Is  be  even  of  less  value  than  tbe 
roots  of  a herb  ? Moreover,  has  not  my  Lord  beard  tbe  story 
of  T’ang  ? Anciently,  T’ang  was  going  to  see  Yi  Yin  and 
let  a son  of  tbe  bouse  of  P’eng  be  tbe  driver.  On  tbe  way, 
tbe  son  of  P’eng  inquired  where  tbe  lord  was  going.  T’ang 
told  Mm  that  be  was  going  to  see  Yi  Yin.  Tbe  son  of  P’eng 
said  : Yi  Yin  is  but  a bumble  man  of  tbe  world.  If  you 
want  to  see  Mm  just  send  for  Mm  and  be  will  feel  quite 
flattered.’’  T’ang  said  : ''  TMs  is  not  what  you  can  under- 
stand. Here  is  some  medicine.  When  taken,  it  will  sharpen 
tbe  ears  and  brighten  tbe  eyes.  Then  I shall  be  pleased  and 
endeavour  to  take  it.  Now,  Yi  Yin  to  me  is  like  a 
good  physician  and  an  efiective  medicine.  Yet  you  don’t 
think  I should  see  him.  It  means  you  do  not  want  to  see 
me  become  good.”  Thereupon  be  dismissed  tbe  son  of  P’eng 


224  THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 

and  did  not  let  him  drive  any  more.  They  did  not  resume 
their  journey  till  the  son  of  P’eng  became  respectful. 

Motse  said : Any  word,  any  action,  that  is  beneficial 
to  Heaven,  the  spirits,  and  the  people  is  to  be  carried  out. 
Any  word,  any  action,  that  is  harmful  to  Heaven,  the  spirits, 
and  the  people  is  to  be  abandoned.  Any  word,  any  action, 
that  is  in  harmony  with  the  sage-kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties, 
Yao,  Shun,  Yii,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  is  to  be  carried  out. 
Any  word,  any  action,  that  is  in  agreement  with  the  wicked 
kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties,  Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,  is 
to  be  abandoned. 

Motse  said : Any  principle  that  can  modify  conduct, 
(expound)  much  ; any  principle  that  cannot  modify  conduct, 
do  not  (expound)  much.  To  (expound)  much  what  cannot 
modify  conduct  is  just  to  wear  out  one’s  mouth. 

Motse  said : The  six  peculiarities  must  be  removed.  When 
silent  one  should  be  deliberating ; when  talking  one  should 
instruct ; when  acting  one  should  achieve  (something). 
When  one  employs  these  three  alternatively  he  will  be  a 
sage.  Pleasure,  anger,  joy,  sorrow,  love  (and  hate)  are  to  be 
removed  and  magnanimity  and  righteousness  are  to  replace 
them.  When  hands,  feet,  mouth,  nose,  ears  (and  eyes)  are 
employed  for  righteousness,  then  one  will  surely  be  a sage. 

Motse  said  to  a few  of  his  disciples : Though  one  cannot 
achieve  righteousness  one  must  not  abandon  the  way,  just 
as  the  carpenter  must  not  blame  the  line  though  he  cannot 
saw  the  lumber  straight. 

Motse  said : As  the  gentlemen  in  the  world  cannot  be 
butchers  of  dogs  and  pigs,  they  would  refuse  when  asked  to 
be  such.  Yet,  though  they  are  not  capable  of  being  ministers 


225 


! 

i 

1 

I 

1 

i 

i 


If 

I 

I 


ESTEEM  FOE  EIGHTEOUSNESS 

in  a state^  they  would  accept  it  when  asked  to  be  such.  Isn't 
this  perverse''? 

Motse  said  : The  blind  say  that  which  is  bright 
is  white j that  which  is  dark  is  black.  Even  the  keen- 
sighted  cannot  alter  this.  But  if  we  should  mix  up  the 
black  and  white  objects  and  let  the  blind  select  them  they 
could  not  do  it.  Hence  the  reason  that  I say  the  blind 
do  not  know  white  from  black  does  not  lie  in  the  matter  of 
definition  but  in  the  process  of  selection.  Now,  the  way 
the  gentlemen  of  the  world  define  magnanimity  even  Yii 
and  T'ang  cannot  alter.  But  when  we  mix  up  magnanimous 
conduct  with  iinmagnanimous  conduct  and  let  the  gentlemen 
of  the  world  choose  them  they  do  not  know  which  is  which. 
So,  the  reason  that  I say  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  do 
not  know  magnanimity  does  not  lie  in  the  matter  of  definition 
either  ; it  also  lies  in  the  process  of  selection. 

Motse  said  : The  gentlemen  of  to-day  handle  their  persons 
with  even  less  care  than  the  merchant  would  handle  a bale 
of  cloth.  When  the  merchant  handles  a bale  of  cloth 
he  dare  not  sell  it  without  discretion ; he  will  surely  select 
a good  one.  But  the  gentlemen  of  to-day  handle  their  persons 
quite  differently.  Whatever  they  happen  to  desire  they  will 
carry  out.  In  the  more  severe  cases  they  fall  into  punish- 
ment ; even  in  less  severe  cases  they  are  visited  with  con- 
demnation. So  then  the  gentlemen  are  even  less  careful 
in  handling  their  persons  than  the  merchant  is  in  handling 
a bale  of  cloth. 

Motse  said : The  gentlemen  of  our  time  desire  to  achieve 
righteousness.  Yet  when  we  endeavour  to  help  them  in 
the  cultivation  of  their  personality  they  become  resentful. 

Q 


226 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


TMs  is  like  desiring  the  completion  of  a wall  and  becoming 
resentful  when  helped  in  the  building.  Isn’t  this  perverse  '1 

Motse  said : The  sage-kings  of  old  wanted  to  have  their 
teaching  passed  to  future  generations.  Therefore  they 
recorded  it  on  bamboos  and  silk  and  engraved  it  in  metal 
and  stone  to  bequeath  to  posterity  so  that  their  descendants 
could  follow  it.  Now  the  ways  of  the  early  kings  are  known 
but  not  carried  out.  This  is  to  break  the  tradition  of  the 
early  kings. 

Motse  brought  numerous  books  in  his  wagon  drawers  on 
his  southern  journey  as  an  envoy  to  Wei.  Hsien  T’angtse 
saw  them  and  was  surprised.  He  inquired  : “ Sir,  you  have 
instructed  Kung  Shang  Kuo  ^ just  to  consider  the  right  and 
wrong  (of  any  case),  and  do  no  more.  Now  you,  sir,  bring 
very  many  books  along.  What  can  be  the  use  for  them  ? ” 
Motse  said : Anciently,  Duke  Tan  of  Chou  read  one  hundred 
pages  every  morning  and  received  seventy  scholars  every 
evening.  Therefore  his  achievements  as  minister  to  the 
emperor  have  lasted  till  this  day.  I have  no  superior  above 
me  to  serve,  nor  any  farm  below  to  attend  to.  How  dare 
I neglect  these  (books)  ? I have  heard,  though  the  (different) 
ways  lead  to  the  same  end  they  are  not  presented  without 
deviations.  And  the  common  people  do  not  know  how  to 
place  proper  importance  in  what  they  hear.  Hence  the  large 
number  of  books.  When  one  has  reviewed  the  ideas  and 
has  thought  deeply  on  them  then  he  understands  the  essentials 
which  lead  to  the  same  end.  Therefore  he  does  not  need  to  be 
instructed  by  books.  Why  should  you  feel  so  much  surprised  ? 


^ Kiing  Shang  Kuo  is  a disciple  of  Motse. 


ESTEEM  FOR  RIGHTEOUSNESS 


227 


Motse  said  to  Kung  Liang'  Huantse  ^ : Wei'  is  a small  state 
situated  between  Ch’i  and  Obm.^  It  is  like  a poor  family 
in  tbe  midst  of  rich  families.  For  a poor  family  to  imitate 
the  rich  i’amilies  in  the  extravagance  in  clothing  and  lood^ 
ruin  is  assured.  Now  we  find  in  your  house  hundreds  of 
decorated  vehicles,  hundreds  of  horses  fed  on  grain,  several 
hundred  women  clothed  with  finery  and  embroidery.  If  the 
expenditures  for  the  decorations  of  the  vehicles,  food  to 
the  horses,  and  the  embroidered  clothes  are  used  to  maintain 
soldiers,  there  should  he  more  than  a thousand.  Upon 
emergency,  several  hundred  of  them  can  be  stationed  at  the 
van  and  several  hundred  can  be  stationed  in  the  rear.  To 
do  this  or  to  let  the  several  hundred  women  hold  the  van 
and  the  rear,  which  is  more  secure  ? I should  think  to  keep 
women  is  not  so  secure  as  to  maintain  soldiers. 

Motse  had  introduced  somebody  to  office  in  Wei.  The 
man  went  and  returned.  Motse  asked  him  why  he  returned. 
He  answered:  ^Mn  counsel  my  opinions  were  not  considered. 
Being  promised  a thousand  p’en^  I was  given  only  five 
hundred.  Therefore  I left.’’  Motse  inquired : Suppose 
you  were  given  more  than  a thousand  p^en,  would  you  still 
leave  ? It  was  answered,  no.  Motse  said  : Then  it  is  not 
because  of  lack  of  consideration.  It  is  because  of  the  small- 
ness of  the  salary. 

Motse  said : The  gentlemen  of  the  world  have  even  less 
regard  for  the  righteous  man  than  for  the  grain  carrier. 

^ Kung  Liang  Hnantse  is  a minister  of  Wei. 

3 Of,  the  Sketch-Map  appended  in  Motse^  the  Neglected  Rival  of 
Gonfucius. 

® A P’en  is  equal  to  thirteen  Chinese  bushels,  ton  d}'.  It  was  the 
practice  at  the  time  to  collect  taxes  and  pay  salaries  all  in  kind. 


228 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 

If  a carrier  was  resting  by  the  road  side  and  was  unable  to 
rise  up,  tli©  gentlemen  would  surely  help  Mm  to  rise  upon 
seeing  him,  whether  he  be  old  or  young,  honourable  or  humble. 
Why  ? Because  it  is  right.  But  when  the  gentleman  who 
practises  righteousness  urges  them  with  the  way  of  the  early 
kings,  they  are  not  only  unwilling  to  carry  it  out  but  will 
even  trample  it  down.  So,  then,  the  gentlemen  of  the  world 
have  even  less  regard  for  the  righteous  man  than  for  the 
grain  carrier. 

Motse  said : The  merchants  go  everywhere  to  do  business 
and  their  gain  is  doubled  and  multiplied.  They  persist 
notwithstanding  the  difficulties  at  the  passes  and  bridges, 
and  the  dangers  of  the  highwaymen  and  robbers.  Now  the 
gentlemen  can  sit  down  and  teach  righteousness.  There 
are  no  difficulties  at  the  passes  and  bridges  or  dangers  from 
highwaymen  and  robbers.  Their  gain  should  be  not  only 
doubled  and  multiplied  but  become  incalculable.  Yet, 
they  will  not  do  it.  Then  the  gentlemen  are  not  as  dis- 
cerning as  the  merchants  in  their  calculation  of  benefits. 

Motse  was  going  North  to  Chi  and  met  a fortune  teller 
on  the  way.  The  fortune  teller  told  him  : “ God  kills  the 
black  dragon  in  the  North  to-day.  Now,  your  complexion 
is  dark.  You  must  not  go  North.’'  Motse  did  not  listen  to 
him  and  went  North.  At  the  Tse  River  he  could  proceed 
no  further  and  returned.  The  fortune  teller  said  : ''I  have 
told  you  that  you  must  not  go  North.”  Mots©  said  : People 
on  the  South,  of  course,  cannot  go  North  (of  the  Tse  River), 
but  neither  can  those  on  the  North  come  South.  (Moreover), 
there  are  the  dark-complexioned,  but  there  are  also  the 
fair-complexioned.  Why  is  it  that  neither  can  proceed  ? 


ESTEEM  FOE  EIGHTBOUSNESS 


229 


Besides,  God  kills  the  blue  dragon  on  tbe  days  of  Chia  and 
of  1 1 in  tbe  East,  the  red  dragon  on  tbe  days  of  Bing  and 
of  Ting  ^ in  the  South,  the  white  dragon  on  the  days  of  Keng 
and  of  Hsin  ^ in  the  West,  and  the  black  dragon  on  the  days 
of  Jen  and  of  Kuei  i in  the  North.  Accordmg  to  you  then 
all  the  travellers  in  the  world  will  be  prohibited,®  then  all 
their  plans  will  be  curbed  and  the  world  made  empty.  Your 
idea  is  not  to  be  adopted. 

Motse  said:  My  principle  is  suf&cient.  To  abandon  my 
principle  and  exercise  thought  is  like  abandoning  the  crop 
and  trying  to  pick  up  grains.  To  refute  my  principle  with 
one’s  own  principle  is  like  throwing  an  egg  against  a 
boulder.  The  eggs  in  the  world  would  be  exhausted  without 
doing  any  harm  to  the  boulder. 

1 These  characters  are  members  in  the  Chinese  Sexagenary  Cycle.  Bri^y 
the  Cycle  consists  of  two  series  of  characters.  The  HeaveiJy  Stems  number 
twelve.  The  Earthly  Branches  number  ten.  As  60  is  the  least  common 
multiple  of  12  and  10.  we  have  the  Cycle  of  Sixty.  In  ancient  ^mea  as 
in  that  of  Motse  it  was  used  to  designate  days.  Later  it  was  used  both  fo 
months  and  years,  and  specially  the  latter.  Eor  a more  detailed  treatment 
of  this  point  cf.  James  Legge : “ On  Chinese  Chronology,  paper  read 

before  the  Victoria  Institute,  1892.  j 

=>  In  the  last  sentence  eight  of  the  ten  Earthly  Branches  are  mentioned. 
Pi  Yuan  in  his  edition  of  the  text  added“  and  the  yellow  dragon  on  the  days 
of  Wu  and  of  Chi  in  the  middle.”  This  addition  seems  to  me  tube  plausible 
because  it  completes  the  five  legendary  dragons,  and  the  statement  m the 
text  will  then  include  all  the  days,  as  each  day  must  have  a Stem  and  a 
Branch  for  its  name,  and  there  will  be  more  sense  to  this  sentence. 


CHAPTER  XLVIIP 
Kung  Mbng 

Kung  Mengfcse  **  said  to  Motse : “ The  gentleman  should 
fold  his  hands  on  the  breast  in  waiting.  He  will  speak  when 
consulted ; he  will  not  speak  when  not  consulted.  He  is 
like  a bell ; when  struck  it  sounds,  when  not  struck  it  does 
not  sound.’  Motse  said:  This  idea  covers  three  phases  of 
which  you  know  but  one ; so  you  do  not  understand  what 
you  are  about.  In  the  case  of  the  ruler’s  committing 

violence  in  the  state,  to  go  and  warn  him  wUl  be  called 
insolence,  and  to  ofier  warning  through  those  around  him 
will  be  called  meddling  with  counsel.  This  is  where  the 
gentleman  hesitates  (to  speak).  Now,  if  the  ruler,  in  his 
administration,  meets  with  some  difficulty  in  the  state 
resembling  a machine  about  to  shoot,®  ...  the  gentleman 
must  give  warning.  So  the  benefit  to  the  ruler  ® . . . . 
In  such  cases  although  he  is  not  asked  he  should  give  counsel. 
Again,  if  the  lord  should  launch  out  on  some  unrighteous, 
ertraJrdinary  enterprise;  and  if  in  possession  of  clever 
mihtary  schemes,  he  should  attack  innocent  states  with  a 
view  to  extending  his  territory,  collecting  taxes  and  gathermg 
wealth ; and  if  in  taking  such  a course  he  meet  with  humilia- 
tion, as  it  is  beneficial  neither  to  the  victor  nor  to 
the  vanquished— and  hence  harmful  to  both— in  such  a 

1 This  chapter  contains  mainly  some  more  criticisms  of  Confucianism. 
The  arguments  are  presented  in  dialc^ue  form  and  are  less  formal  and 
systematic. 

a Supra,  p.  218  and  note  2 same  page. 

® Text  incomplete. 


231 


KUNG  MENG 

case  the  gentleman,  mxist.  respond 'witk^'cciiiisel  thougli  It© 
is  not  asked.  Mor.eoTer,  according  to  what  you  have  saidj^^ 
the  gentleman  is  to  fold  Hs  hands  on  his  breast  and  wait. 
He  will  i-rpeak  w^hen  consulted  ; he  will  not  speak  when  not 
consulted.  He  is  like  a bell ; when  struck  it  sounds,  when 
not  struck  it  does  not  sound.  Now,  none  had  asked  you 
and  yet  you  spoke.  Is  this  what  you  call  sounding  without 
being  struck  ? Is  this  what  you  call  ungentlemanly  ? 

Kung  Meiigts©  said  to  Motse  : How  is  it  possible  for 
the  people  to  be  ignorant  of  what  is  really  good?  For 
instance,  when  the  able  fortune  teller  remains  at  home  and 
does  not  go  abroad,  he  will  have  grain  in  abundance  ; when 
the  beaiitful  maiden  remains  at  home  and  does  not  go  abroad, 
people  will  compete  in  obtaining  her.  On  the  other  hand  if  she 
should  set  forth  to  sell  herself,  none  would  take  her.  Now 
you  go  about,  trying  to  persuade  everybody,  wherefore  all 
this  fuss  ? ’’  Motse  said : In  the  present  world  of  chaos 
those  who  seek  the  beautiful  maidens  are  many.  So,  though 
they  remain  at  home  most  people  would  take  them.  But 
those  vrho  seek  goodness  are  few.  Without  intelligent 
persuasion  people  will  not  understand.  Moreover,  suppose 
here  are  two  people  good  at  fortune  telling.  One  travels 
about  to  tell  people’s  fortunes,  and  the  other  remains  at  home 
and  does  not  go  abroad.  Which  of  these  two  will  have  more 
grain  ? Kung  Mengtse  said  that  he  who  travels  about  and 
tells  people’s  fortunes  will  have  more  grain.  Motse  said  • 
So  with  magnanimity  and  righteousness.  He  who  travels 
about  and  urges  the  people  has  more  merit  also.  Why  not, 
then,  let  us  travel  about  and  urge  the  people  ? 

Kung  Mengtse,  wearing  a ceremonial  hat,  carrying  the 


232 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


officials'  tablet,^  and  in  the  cloak  of  the  learned,  came  to 
see  Motse  and  asked  : Does  the  gentleman  dress  in  appro- 
priate attire  before  acting.  Or  does  he  do  his  business  first 
and  then  consider  his  attire  ? Motse  said  : Action  does 
not  depend  on  attire.  Kung  Mengtse  asked  how  is  it  possible 
to  know.  Motse  said : Formerly,  Lord  Huan  of  Ch'i 
(685-643  B.C.),  wearing  a high  hat  and  a wide  girdle,  with 
a gold  sword  and  wooden  shield,  governed  his  state.  And 
his  state  became  orderly.  Lord  Wen  of  Chin  (780-746  b.o.), 
wearing  garments  of  coarse  cloth  and  sheepskin  cloak,  with 
the  sword  in  a leather  belt,  governed  his  state.  And  his  state 
became  orderly.  Lord  Chuang  of  Gh'u  (671-626  b.c.)^ 
wearing  a gaudy  hat  with  a tassel,  and  a red  garment  and  a 
big  gown,  governed  his  state.  And  his  state  became  orderly. 
Lord  Kou  Chien  of  Yiieh  (496-465  b.c.),  had  his  hair  cut  short  ^ 
and  his  body  tattooed  and  governed  his  state,  and  his  state 
became  orderly.  Now,  these  four  lords  differed  in  attire 
but  agreed  in  action.  I therefore  know  action  does  not  depend 
on  attire.  Kung  Mengtse  said  : That  is  fine.  I have  heard 
that  it  is  unlucky  to  keep  goodness  in  darkness.  So,  let  me 
go  and  put  away  the  tablet  and  change  the  hat  and  come 
back  to  see  you.  Is  this  all  right  ? " Motse  said  : Please 
come  out  with  your  errand.  If  you  have  to  put  away  the 
tablet  and  change  the  hat  before  you  can  see  me,  then,  action 
does  depend  on  attire. 

Kung  Mengtse  said : The  gentleman  has  to  be  ancient 

^ This  tablet  is  called  hu  It  is  something  quite  similar  to  kiiei 

^ both  in  shape  and  in  function.  For  kuei,  see  p.  Ill,  note  2. 

^ The  Chinese  then  customarily  let  their  hair  grow  and  wound  it  up  on  the 
top  of  their  heads. 


KUXG  MENG 


233 


in  attire  and  in  speecli  before  be  can  be  magnanimous/’ 
Motse  said  : In  ancient  times,  minister  Fei  Chung  of  Emperor 
Chow  of  Shang  was  the  terror  of  the  world.  While  Baron 
Chi  and  Baron  Wei  were  the  sages  of  the  world.  Now  these 
spoke  the  same  dialect,  but  the  latter  were  magnanimous 
and  the  former  was  wicked.  (Later),  Duke  Tan  of  Chou  was 
the  sage  of  the  world  and  Uncle  Kuan  was  the  villain  of  the 
world.  Now  these  wore  the  same  attire  ^ but  the  former  was 
magnanimous  and  the  latter  wicked.  Then,  virtue  evidently 
does  not  depend  on  the  antiquity  of  attire  and  speech.  More- 
over, you  are  following  only  Chou  and  not  Hsia.  Your 
antiquity  does  not  go  back  far  enough. 

Kung  Mengtse  said  to  Motse : ‘‘  In  ancient  times,  in  assigning 
ranks  the  sage-kings  ^ crowned  the  most  sagacious  as  emperor, 
and  appointed  the  others  as  ministers  and  secretaries. 
Now  Confucius  had  an  extensive  knowledge  of  poetry^  and 
history,^  a clear  understanding  of  ceremonials  ^ and  music, ^ 
and  an  intimate  insight  into  many  things.  If  it  fell  upon 
Confucius  to  be  the  sage-king,  why  should  he  not  make 
himself  emperor?”  Motse  said:  The  wise  man  should 
reverence  Heaven  and  worship  the  spirits,  love  the  people 
and  economize  in  expenditures.  Combining  these  we  get 
wisdom.  Now,  you  say,  Confucius  had  an  extensive  know- 
ledge of  poetry  and  history,  a clear  understanding  of 
ceremonials  and  music,  and  an  intimate  insight  into  many 
things.  Therefore,  you  think,  he  should  be  made  emperor. 

1 Kuan  and  Tan  were  brothers  and  both  were  uncles  of  Emperor  Ch'eng. 
Naturally  they  had  the  same  attire  of  royalty. 

® The  sense  of  “ sage-king  here  seems  to  denote  a disinterested  judge 
of  merits  selecting  rulers  for  the  people. 

® These  were  the  departments  of  the  Classics. 


Ill  ' 


'234: 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


This  is  like  estimating  one’s  wealth  by  counting  the  number 
of  notches.^ 

Kung  Mengtse  said : ‘‘  Poverty  or  wealth,  old  age  or 
untimely  death,  all  are  determined  by  Heaven  and  they  can- 
not  be  altered,’’  Again,  he  said  : ''  The  superior  man  must 
learn.”  Motse  said : To  hold  fatalism  and  teach  people 
to  learn  is  like  telling  him  to  cover  his  hair  and  yet  remove 
his  hat. 

Kung  Mengtse  said  to  Motse : There  is  only  righteousness 
and  unrighteousness,  but  no  such  thing  as  propitiousness 
or  unpropitiousness.”  Motse  said : The  ancient  sage- 
kings  all  regarded  the  ghosts  and  spirits  as  intelligent  and 
in  control  of  calamity  and  blessing.  They  held  there  was 
propitiousness  and  unpropitiousness  and  thereby  the  govern- 
ment was  well  administered  and  the  country  was  secure. 
From  Chieh  and  Chow  down  they  all  regarded  the  ghosts 
and  spirits  as  unintelligent  and  not  in  control  of  calamity 
and  blessing.  They  held  there  was  no  propitiousness  and 
unpropitiousness,  and  thereby  the  government  became 
disorderly  and  the  country  in  danger.  So,  the  book  of  the 
ancient  kings  Ghitse  ” ^ says,  “ Pride  brings  calamity.” 
That  is  to  say,  the  evil  act  will  be  punished  and  the  good 
act  will  be  rewarded. 

Motse  said  to  Kung  Mengtse : According  to  the  ceremonial, 

1 Contracts  for  loans  were  then  made  on  bamboos.  The  creditor  and  the 
debtor  were  to  hold  a piece  each.  And  the  number  of  notches  cut  on  the 
edges  is  the  mark  of  identification.  The  story  tells  of  a man  of  Sung  who 
while  travelling  picked  up  one  part  of  a contract.  He  was  pleased  and  went 
home  and  counted  the  number  of  notches  to  find  out  how  rich  he  was. 

^ Apparently  a lost  essay  in  Shu  Ghing  named  after  Chitse.  Chitse  is 
referred  to  in  an  earlier  paragraph  in  this  chapter  as  Baron  Chi,  p.  233. 


KUNG  MENG 


235 


for  tlie  death  of  the  ruler,  the  parents,  the  wife,  and  the  first- 
born son,  there  shall  he  mourning  for  three  years.  For  the 
elder  uncle,  younger  uncle,  elder  brother,  younger  brother,  and 
first  cousins  within  the  family,  five  months.  And  for  the  aunt, 
the  sister,  the  uncle  on  mother's  side,  and  the  nephew  on 
sisters  side,  there  will  be  mourning  of  several  months  for 
each.  Many  also  use  the  intervals  between  periods  of 
moiixning  to  read  the  Three  Hundred  Poems  according  to 
rhymes,  to  play  them  on  the  string  instruments,^  to  sing  them, 
and  to  dance  to  them.^  If  your  counsel  should  be  followed 
when  can  the  gentleman  attend  to  government,  the  common 
man  to  work  ? Kung  Mengtse  said  : When  the  country 
is  in  chaos  it  should  be  put  in  order ; when  it  is  in  order, 
ceremonials  and  music  may  be  pursued.  When  the  country 
is  poor  work  should  be  attended  to  ; when  it  is  rich, 
ceremonials  and  music  may  be  pursued."  Motse  said: 
A country  may  be  orderly.  But  it  is  because  it  is  being  well 
governed  that  it  is  orderly.  As  soon  as  good  administration 
is  abandoned,  order  disappears  also.  A country  may  be  rich. 
But  it  is  because  work  is  being  attended  to  that  it  is  rich. 
As  soon  as  work  is  abandoned,  wealth  disappears  also.  There- 
fore although  a country  is  orderly  it  is  necessary  to  encourage 
unceasing  attention  to  administration.  Now,  you  say, 
when  the  country  is  in  order,  ceremonials  and  music  may  be 
pursued.  But  put  it  in  order  when  it  becomes  disorderly. 
This  is  similar  to  digging  a well  when  some  one  is  choked 

^ The  sti'ing  mstmments  are  namely,  ch'in  and  she.  Bu^ra,  p.  175,  and 
note  1 same  page. 

® This  seems  to  he  similar  to  the  dancing  interpretation  of  classical 
compositions  in  the  West.  Evidently  the  departments  of  poetry,  music, 
and  dancing  were  not  marked  out  very  clearly. 


236 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


and  to  seeking  a physician  when  some  one  is  dead.  In 
ancient  times,  the  wicked  , kings  of  the  Three  Dynasties, 
Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,,  revelled  in  music,  and  did  not 
remember  their  people.  Therefore  they  suffered  capital 
punishment  and  brought  calamity  to  their  empire.  And  it 
was  all  from  following  this  idea. 

Kung  Meiigtse  said  that  there  were  no  ghosts  and  spirits ; 
again,  he  said  that  the  superior  man  must  learn  sacrifice 
and  worship.  Motse  said : To  hold  there  are  no  spirits  and 
learn  saciiScial  ceremonials  is  comparable  to  learning  the 
ceremonials  of  hospitality  while  there  is  no  guest  or  to  making 
fishing  nets  while  there  are  no  fish. 

Kung  Mengtse  said  to  Motse : ''You  think  mourning  for 
three  years  is  wrong.  Your  mourning  for  three  days  is  also 
wrong.’’  Motse  replied : You  hold  mourning  for  three 
years  and  condemn  mourning  for  three  days.  This  is  similar 
to  the  naked  person  condemning  the  person  who  lifted  up 
his  garments  for  indecency. 

Kung  Mengtse  asked  Motse  whether  it  is  wisdom  when 
one  knows  something  better  than  some  other  person.  Motse 
answered : A fool  may  know  something  better  than  some 
other  person.  Yet  can  the  fool  be  said  to  be  wise  ? 

Kung  Mengtse  said  : " I mourn  for  three  years  in  imitation 
of  the  affection  that  my  son  shows  to  his  parents.”  Motse 
said : But  does  the  baby  have  an  intelligence' to  love  only 
its  parents?  Why,  then,  should  it  keep  on  crying  when 
the  parents  are  not  to  be  had  ? ^ It  is  really  the  extreme 

^ The  theory  in  modern  social  psychology  that  the  baby's  love  for  its 
parents  is  due  to  conditioned  response  may  easily  be  grafted  here  to  Motse’ s 
scepticism  about  native  intelligence.  But  we  must  be  cautious  to  say  that 
he  really  meant  this. 


KUKG  MENG 


237 


degree  of  foolisliiiess.  Tiius,  is  the  intelligence  of  the 
Coiifuciaiiists  any  higher  than  that  of  the  baby  ? 

Motse  asked  a Confucianist  why  the  Confncianists  pursued 
music.  He  replied,  music:  is  pursued  for  music’s  sake.  Motse 
said  : Yon  have  not  yet  answered  me.  Suppose  I asked, 
why  build  houses.  And  you  .answered,  it  is  to  keep  off 
the  cold  in  winter,  and  the  heat  in  summer,  and  to  separate 
men  from  women.  Then  you  would  have  told  me  the  reason 
for  building  houses.  Kow  I am  asking  why  pursue  music. 
And  you  answer  music  is  pursued  for  music’s  sake.  This 
is  comparabie  to  : “ Why  bmld  houses  ? ” “Houses  are 
built  for  houses’  ' sakes.”: 

Motse  said  to  Ch’engtse  ^ : In  the  teaching  of  the  Con- 
fucianists  there  are  four  principles  sufficient  to  ruin  the 
empire : The  Gonfiicianists  hold  Heaven  is  unintelligent, 
and  the  ghosts  are  inanimate.  Heaven  and  spirits  are  dis- 
pleased. This  is  sufficient  to  ruin  the  world.  Again  they 
(practise)  elaborate  funerals  and  extended  mourning.  They 
use  several  imier  and  outer  coffins,  and  many  pieces  of  shrouds. 
The  funeral  procession  looks  like  house-movmg.  Crying 
and  weeping  last  three  years.  They  cannot  stand  up  without 
support  and  cannot  walk  without  a cane.  Thek  ears  cannot 
hear  and  their  eyes  cannot  see.  This  is  sufficient  to  ruin 
the  world.  And  they  play  the  string  instruments  and  dance 
and  sing  and  practise  songs  and  music.  This  is  sufficient 
to  ruin  the  empire.  And,  finally,  they  suppose  there  is 
fate  and  that  poverty  or  wealth,  old  age  or  untimely  death, 
order  or  chaos,  security  or  danger,  are  all  predetermined  and 
cannot  be  altered.  Applying  this  belief,  those  in  authority, 
^ Gh'engtse  or  Ch'eng  Fan  is  another  Confucianist. 


238 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


of  course,  will  not  attend  to  government  and  those  below 
will  not  attend  to  work.  Again,  this  is  sufficient  to  ruin  the 
world.  Cb’engtse  said : Sir,  you  are  accusing  the  Con- 
fucianists  of  too  mucli.’’  Motse  said : If  the  Confucianists 
bold  nothing  Like  these  four  principles  and  yet  I say  they 
do  then  it  is  false  accusation.  Now  that  the  Confucianists 
do  hold  these  four  |)rinciples  and  I say  so,  then  it  is  not  accusa- 
tion but  information. 

Oh’engtse  had  nothing  more  to  say  and  went  out.  Motse 
called  him  back.  After  being  seated  he  continued  : What 
you,  sir,  have  just  said  is  not  without  fault.  For  according 
to  what  you  have  said,  there  will  be  no  praise  of  Yii  or  blame 
of  Chieh  and  Chow.’’  Motse  replied  : Not  at  all.  You  are 
only  cleverly  criticizing  me  according  to  traditional  notions. 
When  attack  is  heavy  defence  must  be  strong.  When  attack  is 
light  defence  must  be  light.  To  criticize  according  to 
traditional  notions  is  similar  to  trying  to  kill  a moth  with 
a thill. 

In  a discussion  with  Ch’engtse,  Motse  cited  Confucius. 
Ch’engtse  inquired  why,  since  he  condemned  Confucianism, 
he  cited  Confucius.  Motse  said  : This  has  reference  to  what 
is  right  and  cannot  be  altered.  When  the  bird  becomes 
aware  of  the  danger  of  heat  and  of  drought,  it  flies  high. 
When  the  fish  becomes  aware  of  the  danger  of  heat  and  of 
drought,  it  swims  low.  In  such  circumstances  even  the 
deliberations  of  Yii  and  T’ang  cannot  differ  from  this.  The  bird 
and  the  fish  may  be  said  to  be  unintelligent.  Yet,  in  some 
instances,  even  Yii  and  T’ang  would  follow  them.  Should 
I never  cite  Confucius  ? 

A man  visited  Motse’s  school.  He  was  physically  well 


KUNG  MENG 


239 


built  and  mentally  brilliant.  Desiring -to  bave  Mm  m Ms 
scliool.  Motse  told  him  to  come  and  study  and  that  lie  would 
make  him  an  official.  ■,  Persuaded,  by  such  an  attractive 
promise,  he  came  to  study.  In  a year,  he  demanded  a 
position  of  Motse,  Motse  said:  I have  not  made  you  an 
official.  But  have  you  not  heard  the  story  of  Lu  ? There 
were  five  brothers  in  Lu  whose  father  passed  away.  The 
eldest  son  loved  wine  and  would  not  conduct  the  funeral. 
The  four  younger  brothers  said  to  him,  You  conduct  the 
funeral  for  us,  and  we  shall  buy  wine  for  you.’’  He  was 
persuaded  by  such  an  attractive  promise  and  buried  (his 
father).  After  the  burial  he  demanded  wine  of  the  four 
brothers.  The  four  brothers  told  him,  We  will  not  give 
you  any  wine.  You  are  to  bury  your  father  and  we,  ours. 
Is  your  father  only  ours  ? If  you  don’t  bury  him  people 
will  laugh  at  you,  therefore  we  urged  you  to  bury  him.” 
Now,  you  have  done  right  and  I have  done  right,  is  it  only 
my  righteousness  ? If  you  don’t  learn,  people  will  laugh  at 
you.  Therefore  I urged  you  to  learn. 

A man  visited  Motse’s  school.  Motse  said : Why  not 
come  and  study  ? Came  the  reply,  None  of  my  family 
is  learned.”  Motse  said:  No  matter.  Does  he  who  loves 
beauty  say,  none  of  my  family  loves  it,  therefore  I will  not  ? 
And  does  he  who  desires  wealth  and  honour  say,  none  of 
my  family  desires  them,  therefore  I will  not  ? Now,  in  the 
love  of  beauty  and  desire  for  wealth  and  honour,  one  goes 
ahead  regardless  of  others.  And  righteousness  is  the  greatest 
thing  in  the  world.  Why  should  one  follow  others  in  doing  it  1 

A man  visited  Motse’s  school  and  said  to  Motse : ‘‘Sir, 
you  teach  that  the  ghosts  and  spirits  are  intelligent  and  can 


240 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


bring  calamity  or  blessing  to  man.  Tliey  will  enrich  the  good 
and  harm  the  evil  Now,  I have  served  you  for  a long  time. 
Yet  no  blessing  has  come.  Can  it  be  that  your  teaching 
is  not  entirely  correct,  and  that  the  ghosts  and  spirits  are  not 
intelligent  ? Else  why  don’t  I obtain  any  blessing  ? ” 
Motse  said:  Though  you  have  not  obtained  any  blessing, 
how  does  that  invalidate  my  teaching  and  how  does  that  make 
the  ghosts  and  spirits  nnintelligent  ? He  replied  that  he 
did  not  know.  Motse  continued : Suppose  there  is  a man 
ten  times  as  virtuous  as  you  are,  can  you  praise  him  ten  times 
while  you  praise  yourself  but  once  ? He  answered  that  he 
could  not.  Now  suppose  there  is  a man  a himdred  times 
as  virtuous  as  you  are,  can  you  during  your  whole  life  praise 
him  and  not  praise  yourself  even  once  ? He  answered  that 
he  could  not.  Motse  said : He  who  obscured  the  virtues 
of  one  person  is  guilty.  Now,  you  have  obscured  the  virtues 
of  so  many.  You  must  be  guilty  of  very  much.  "Wherewith 
can  you  expect  blessing  ? 

Motse  was  sick.  Tieh  Pi  came  and  inquired : Sir, 

you  have  taught  the  ghosts  and  spirits  are  intelligent  and 
are  in  control  of  calamity  and  blessing.  They  will  reward 
the  good  and  punish  the  evil.  Now  you  are  a sage.  How 
can  you  become  sick  ? Can  it  be  that  your  teaching  was 
not  entirely  correct,  that  the  ghosts  and  spirits  are  after 
all  unintelligent  ? Motse  said : Though  I am  sick  how 
(does  it  follow  that  the  ghosts  and  spirits)  should  he  un- 
intelligent ? . There  are  many  ways  by  which  a man  can 
contract  diseases.  Some  are  affected  by  climate,  some  by 
fatigue.  If  there  are  a hundred  gates  and  only  one  of  them 
is  closed,  how  is  it  that  the  burglar  should  not  be  able  to  get  in  ? 


KUNG  MING  241 

Some  of  tile  pupils  asked  to. learn  archery  with  Motse. 
Motse  said:  Impossible.  The  .wise  should  measure  how 
far  his  enei'g}’-  can  go  and  plan  his  career  accordingly. 
Even  a soldier  cannot  fight  and  help  somebody  at  the  same 
time.  Now  jon  are  no  soldiers.  How  can  you  be  both 
accomplished  scholars  and  accomplished  archers  ? 

Some  of  the  pupils  reported  to  Motse  that  Kaotse^ 
proclaimed  Jlotse  to  be  teaching  righteousness  but  doing 
wickedness,  and  urged  him  to  denounce  Kaotse.  Motse 
said  : That  would  not  do.  To  praise  my  teaching  and  blame 
my  conduct  is  yet  better  than  indifference.  Suppose  there 
is  some  one  w-ho  declares  that  Ti  ^ is  quite  unmagnanimous, 
that  he  reverences  Heaven,  worships  spirits,  and  loves  men — 
this  is  yet  better  than  indifference.  Now,  Kaotse  was  quite 
discriminating  in  his  statements.  He  does  not  blame  me 
for  teaching  magnanimity  and  righteousness.  So,  blame 
from  Kaotse  is  yet  better  than  indifference. 

Some  of  the  pupils  reported  to  Motse  that  Kaotse  was 
zealous  in  practising  magnanimity.  Motse  remarked : It 
may  not  really  be  so  at  all.  Kaotse  practises  magnanimity 
in  the  same  way  as  the  man  who  stands  on  his  tip  toe  to 
appear  tall  and  spreads  himself  to  appear  broad.  It  cannot 
last  long. 

^ There  is  a Book  in  Ilencius  ^ ^ named  “ Kaotse ",  Legge, 
voL  ii,  bk.  vi,  pp.  270-324.  Kaotse  there  was  the  advocate  of  the 
morally  indifferent  character  of  original  human  nature,  engaged  in  a con- 
troversy with  Mencius  who  taught  natural  goodness.  He  is  said  to  have 
once  been  a pupil  of  Mencius.  If  this  is  true,  the  Kaotse  here  mentioned 
must  be  a different  person.  But  considering  that  Motse  probably  died  about 
390  B.C.,  and  that  Mencius  was  born  372  B.C.,  it  is  not  impossible  for  the 
same  person  to  have  held  conversations  with  both  Motse  and  Mencius. 

2 Here  Motse  is  referring  to  himself  by  name. 

K 


242 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE- 


Kaotse  said  to  Motse  that  he  can  administer  the  country 
and  the  government.  Motse  said : To  govern  is  to  carry 
out  what  one  teaches.  Now  you  don’t  behave  according 
to  what  you  teach,  this  means  that  you  yourself  are  in  revolt. 
Being  unable  to  govern  one’s  self,  how  can  one  govern  the 
country  ? Your  self  will  set  it  in  chaos. 


BOOK  XIII 

CHAPTBE  XLIX 
Lu’s  Question  * 

The  Lord  of  Ln  asked  Motse  : ‘'I  fear  Ch’i  will  attack  me. 
Is  there  any  remedy?’’  Motse  said : Yes,  the  sage-kings 
of  the  Thi’ee  Dynasties,  Yli,  T’ang,  Wen,  and  Wu,  were 
originally  feudal  lords  of  states  of  only  a hundred  li  square. 
Yet,  enlisting  the  loyal  and  practising  righteousness,  they 
acquired  , the  empire.  While  the  wicked  kings  of  the  Three 
Dynasties,  Chieh,  Chow,  Yu,  and  Li,  by  estranging  the  loyal 
and  practising  wickedness,  lost  the  empire.  I wish  your 
Lordship  would  reverence  Heaven  and  the  spirits  above  and 
love  and  benefit  the  people  below ; prepare  plenty  of  furs 
and  money  and  humble  your  speech  to  befriend  all  the 
neighbouring  lords,  and  lead  the  state  to  serve  Ch’i.  Besides 
this,  indeed  nothing  can  be  done. 

Ch’i  was  going  to  attack  Lu,  Motse  said  to  Hsiang  Tse 
Niii^  : To  attack  Lu  is  a great  wrong  on  the  part  of  Ch’i, 
Formerly, the  Lord  of  Wu  attacked  Yueh  on  the  east  and  drove 
(Lord  Kou  Chion  of  Ylxeh)  to  take  refuge  upon  Kuei  Chi.^  He 
attacked  Ch’u  on  the  west  and  held  fast  Lord  Chao  at  Sui. 
On  the  north  he  attacked  Ch’i  and  brought  Kuotse  ^ back 
to  Wu.  The  feudal  lords  then  took  vengeance  and  his  people 

^ Hsiang  Tse  Niu  is  a general  of  Ch'i. 

2 Knei  Chi  is  the  name  of  a hill. 

® Knots©  is  also  a general  of  Chi.  His  name  is  Kuo  Shu.  But  the  two 
words  ‘‘  kuo  tse  " ^ ^ might  also  mean  the  Prince  of  the  state.  Fork©, 
for  instance,  adopted  the  latter  reading  in  his  translation. 


244 


THE  WOEKS  OP  MOTSE 


complained  of  the  hardship  and  would  not  be  commanded. 
Thereupon  the  state  perished  and  the  Lord  of  Wu  w'as  executed. 
Formerly,  Chih  Po  attacked  both  the  house  of  Fan  and  the 
house  of  Chimg  Using,  and  absorbed  all  the  land  of  the  Three 
Chin  states.  The  feudal  lords  then  took  vengeance  and  Ms 
people  complained  of  the  hardsMp  and  would  not  be  com- 
manded. Thereupon  the  state  perished  and  he  was  executed. 
Therefore  the  attack  of  a large  state  on  a small  state  is  injuiy 
to  both  and  the  consequences  of  the  wrong  will  always  return 
to  the  large  state. 

Motse  saw  the  Grand  Lord  of  Ch’i  and  said  : Suppose  here 
is  a sword.  When  it  is  tried  on  a man’s  neck  it  severs  it 
swiftly.  Can  it  be  said  to  be  sharp  ? The  Grand  Lord  said 
it  is  sharp.  Motse  said  : When  it  is  tried  on  several  men’s 
necks,  it  severs  them  swiftly.  Can  it  be  said  to  be  sharp  ? 
The  Grand  Lord  said  it  is  sharp.  Motse  said : Of  course, 
the  sword  is  (proved  to  be)  sharp,  but  who  will  take  the  curse 
of  the  deed  upon  him  ? ^ The  Grand  Lord  said  that  the  sivord 
reaped  the  benefit  but  he  who  tries  it  will  be  visited  by  the 
curse  for  the  act.  Motse  continued  : Now  to  capture  a 
state,  ruin  an  army,  and  destroy  the  people — who  will  be 
visited  by  the  curse  for  this  act  ? The  Grand  Lord  looked 
down  and  up  and  deliberated,  saying : ''I  shall  be  visited 
with  the  curse  for  this  act.” 

Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  was  going  to  attack  Cheng.  Motse 
heard  of  it  and  tried  to  stop  him,  saying  to  him : Suppose 
within  the  borders  of  Lu  Yang  the  large  cities  should  attack  the 

^ There  is  a play  upon  words  in  this  paragraph  in  the  Chinese  text,  which 
disappears  in  the  translation.  The  word  used  for  sharp  is  “ li  ” ^Ij, 
which  means  also  “ benefit  "h  And  it  is  as  the  opposite  to  the  latter  meaning 
of  the  word  that  the  idea  of  curse  is  brought  in. 


LU’S  QUESTION 


small  cities  and  the  large  houses  attack  the  small  hoiisosj  killing 
the  people  and  carrying  away  the  oxen  and  horses,  dogs  and 
hogs,  cloth  and  silk,  and  grains  and  valuables.  What  would 
you  say  % Prhiee  Wen  of,  Lu  Yang  replied  : ''  Within  the 
borders  of  Lii  Yang  all  are  my  subjects.  Now,  should  the 
large  cities  attack  the  small  cities  and  the  large  houses  attack 
the  small  houses,  carrying  away  their  valuables,  I should 
punish  them  severely.”  Motse  said  : Now,  Heaven  possesses 
the  whole  world  just  as  your  Lordship  possesses  your  state. 
But  you  are  raising  an  army  to  attack  Cheng.  Shouldn't 
punisliinent  from  Heaven  come  to  you  ? 

Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  said : “ Why  should  you,  sir, 
prevent  me  from  attacking  Cheng  ? I attack  Cheng  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  Heaven.  The  people  of  Cheng 
have  murdered  their  father  ^ for  three  generations.  Heaven 
has  been  visiting  them  with  punishment.  It  has  caused 
them  to  be  unprosperous  for  three  years.  I am  only  helping 
Heaven  to  carr}^  out  the  punishment.”  Motse  said  : The 
people  of  Cheng  have  murdered  their  father  for  three  genera- 
tions. Heaven  has  been  visiting  them  with  punishment. 
It  has  caused  them  to  be  improsperous  for  three  years.  The 
punishment  of  Heaven  is  sufficient.  Yet,  you  are  raising 
an  army  to  attack  Cheng,  proclaiming : My  attack  on 
Chong  is  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  Heaven.”  Suppose 
there  is  a man  whose  son  is  strong  but  insolent.  So  the 
father  punished  him  with  a ferule.  But  the  neighbour^'s 
father  struck  him  with  a heavy  staff,  saying : ''  It  is  in 


^ ‘ ‘ Fatb  er  ’ ’ here  refers  to  the  lord.  Among  the  five  cardinal  relations  that 
between  the  lord  and  the  minister  comes  first  and  that  between  the  father 
and  the  son  second. 


246 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


accordance  with  Ms  father’s  will  that  I strike  him/’  Isn’t 
this  perversity  ? 

Motse  said  to  Prince  Wen  of  Ln  Yang : If  a lord  had 
attacked  the  neighbouring  states,  killed  their  people,  carried 
away  their  oxen  and  horses,  grains  and  valuables,  a lord 
might  yet  record  it  on  bamboos  and  silk  and  engrave  it  on 
metal  and  stone  and  write  it  up  into  maxims  on  the  bell 
and  the  ting  to  hand  down  to  posterity,  saying ; ''  Koiie 
possess  so  much  as  I.”  How,  the  unscrupulous  common 
man  also  attacks  neighbouring  homes,  kills  their  inmates, 
and  takes  the  dogs  and  hogs,  food  and  clothing.  They  would 
also  like  to  record  it  on  bamboos  and  silk  and  write  it  up  into 
maxims  on  the  vessels  and  dishes  to  hand  down  to  posterity, 
saying : None  possesses  so  much  as  1.”  Is  this  permissible  ? 
Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  said  : ‘‘According  to  what  you  have 
said  then  what  the  world  takes  for  granted  may  not  be  right 
after  all.” 

Motse  said  to  Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  : The  gentlemen  of 
the  world  know  only  trifles  but  not  things  of  importance. 
If  a man  steals  a dog  or  pig,  they  call  him  wicked.  But 
stealing  a state  or  a city  is  regarded  as  righteous.  This 
is  similar  to  calling  it  white  when  one  sees  a little  white,  but 
calling  it  black  when  he  sees  much  white.  And  this  is  what 
is  meant  when  we  say  the  gentlemen  of  the  world  know  only 
trifles  and  not  things  of  importance. 

Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  said  to  Motse  : “ There  is  a cannibal 
tribe  on  the  south  of  Ch’u.^  When  the  first  son  is  born 

^ The  same  tribe  was  mentioned  in  another  connexion  on  p.  133.  This 
point  needs  to  he  made,  as  in  the  Chinese  text  the  name  there  given  is  ^ 
and  not  ^ as  is  given  here,  and  is  liable  to  mis-reading.  Evidently  they 


LU^S  QUESTION 


247 


they  dissect  and  cloTonr  liim.  This  is  said  to  b6  propitious 
to  his  younger  brothers.  If  he  tastes  delicious,  he  will  be 
offered  to  the  chief,  and  if  the  chief  is  pleased  the  father 
will  be  rewarded.  Isn't  this  a wicked  custom  ? ’’  Motse 
said  : So  is  the  custom  in  China.  How  is  killing  the  father 
and  rewarding  the  son  diSorent  from  devouring  the  son  and 
rewarding  the  father  ? If  magnanimity  and  righteousness 
are  not  obser\"ed,  wherefore  shall  we  condemn  the  barbarians 
for  eating  their  sons  ? 

Upon  the  death  of  a favourite  concubine  of  the  Lord  of 
Lu,  somebody  in  Lu  wrote  an  obituary  for  her.  The  Lord 
of  Lu  was  pleased  wuth  it  and  employed  the  writer.  Motse 
heard  of  it  and  remarked : An  obituary  is  but  to  narrate 
the  ambitions  of  the  dead.  To  employ  the  man  because  his 
obituary  is  pleasing  is  like  making  the  wild  cat  pull  a carriage. 

Prince  Wen  of  Lu  Yang  asked  Motse : Suppose  somebody 
was  recommended  as  a loyal  minister.  And  he  would  bow 
down  when  I let  him  bow  down  ; he  would  bend  back  when 
I let  him  bend  back.  Staying  there  he  would  be  silent, 
and  when  called  upon  he  would  answer.  Can  this  be  said 
to  be  loyal  ? ’’  Motse  said  : To  bow  down  when  permitted, 
to  bend  back  when  permitted — ^this  is  but  a shadow.  To 
remain  silent  when  let  alone,  to  answer  when  called  upon — 
this  is  but  an  echo.  What  would  your  Lordship  get  out  of 
an  echo  or  a shadow  ? According  to  my  conception  of  a 
loyal  minister,  when  the  superior  is  at  fault  he  should  wait 
and  warn  ; possessing  a good  idea  he  should  give  counsel 
to  the  superior  without  revealing  it  to  the  world  ; he  should 
correct  irregularities  and  lead  in  goodness ; he  should 
identify  himself  with  the  superior  and  not  ally  himself  with 


248 


THE  WOEKS  OF  MOTSl 


subordinates.  So  that  goodness  and  excellences  will  be 
attributed  to  the  superior  and  complaints  and  gi’iidges 
lodged  against  the  subordinates  ; so  that  ease  and  happiness 
be  with  the  superior  and  trouble  and  worry  with  the  ministers. 
This  is  what  I call  a loyal  minister. 

The  Lord  of  Lu  consulted  Motse,  saying : b Now  I have 
two  sons.  One  likes  learning  and  the  other  likes  dividing 
j)roperty  for  people.  Which  one  should  be  crowned  Prince  ? 
Motse  said  : We  can’t  tell  (just  from  this).  It  ma,y  be  that 
they  behave  so  just  for  the  praise  and  reward  of  it.  The 
fisherman’s  bait  is  not  intended  to  feed  the  fish.  Trapping 
a mouse  with  worms  is  not  for  the  love  of  the  mouse.  I wush 
your  Lordship  would  observe  both  their  intention  and 
consequences. 

There  was  a man  in  Lu  who  sent  his  son  to  Motse  to  study. 
The  son  perished  in  a battle.  The  father  blamed  Motse  for 
it.  Motse  said  : You  wanted  to  have  your  son  trained.  Now 
he  had  completed  his  training  and  died  in  battle.  And  you 
become  sore.  This  is  like  trying  to  sell  something,  and  yet 
becoming  sore  when  it  is  sold.  Isn’t  this  peculiar  ? 

Among  the  rustic  people  living  south  of  Lu  there  was  a man 
by  the  name  of  Wu  Lii.  Making  pottery  in  winter  and  farming 
in  summer,  he  compared  himself  to  Shun.  Motse  heard  of 
him  and  went  to  see  him.  Wu  Lii  told  Motse  : ''Righteous- 
ness is  just  righteousness.  Wherefore  all  the  verbosity?  ” 
Moste  asked  him : Now,  does  what  you  call  righteousness 
possess  power  to  serve  other  people  and  produce  wealth  to 
divide  among  the  people  ? Wu  Lii  said  that  it  does.  Motse 
continued : I have  deliberated  about  this  matter.  I have 
thought  of  becoming  a farmer  and  feeding  the  people  in 


LU’S  QUESTION  249 


the  Tvorici  If  that  could  be  successful  I would  become  oue. 
But  when  a farnier’s  produce  is  divided  among  the  world, 
each  person  ennnot  get  even  one  sheng  of  grain.  Even 
he  can  obtain  that  nmch,  evidently  that  cannot  feed  all 
the  hungry  in  the  world.  I have  thought  of  becoming 
a weaver  and  clothing  all  the  people  in  the  world, 
that  could  be  succossfiil  I would  become  one.  But  when 
a weaver's  goods  are  divided  among  the  world,  each 
cannot  get  even  a foot  of  cloth.  Even  if  he  can  obtain 
much,  evidently  that  cannot  keep  all  who  are  cold  in 
world  warm.  I have  thought  of  putting  on  an  armour 
carrying  a weapon  to  come  to  the  feudal  lord's  rescue.  If 
that  could  be  successful  I would  become  a soldier.  Now 
it  is  evident  that  a soldier  cannot  hold  out  against  a regular 
army.  I concluded  that  none  of  these  is  as  good  as 
familiarize  myself  with  the  Tao  of  the  ancient  sage- 
and  discover  their  principles,  and  to  understand  the 
of  the  sages  and  be  clear  about  their  expressions ; and 
these  to  persuade  the  rulers  and  then  the  common  people 
and  the  pedestrians.  When  the  rulers  adopt  my  principl 
their  states  will  be  orderly.  When  the  common  people  and 
the  pedestrians  adopt  my  principles  their  conduct  will  be 
regulated.  Therefore  I think  though  I do  not  plow  and 
the  hungry  or  weave  and  clothe  the  cold,  I have 
merit  than  those  who  plow  and  feed,  and  weave  and 
Therefore  I think  my  merit  is  greater  than  that  of 
who  plow  and  weave  though  I do  not  do  so. 

Wu  Lii  kept  on  saying,  ''  Eighteousness  is  just 
ness.  Wherefore  all  the  verbosity  ? Motse  continued : 
Suppose  the 


250 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


more  ineritj  the  man  who  teaches  people  to  plow,  or  he  who 
does  not  teach  people  to  plow  bnt  simply  plows  himself  ? 
Wu  Lii  answered  that  he  that  teaches  others  to  plow  deserves 
more  merit,  Motse  said : In  the  attack  of  an  niirighteons 
state,  does  he  that  beats  the  drum  and  urges  the  soldiers 
to  fight  on,  or  does  he  that  does  not  beat  the  dnini  and  urge 
the  soldiers  to  fight  on  but  only  fights  on  himself  deserve 
more  merit  ? Wu  Lii  said  that  lie  that  beats  the  drum  and 
urges  the  soldiers  to  fight  on  deserves  more  merit.  Motse 
continued : Kow  the  common  people  and  the  pedestrians 
in  the  world  know  little  about  righteousness.  Katurallv 
those  Avho  teach  them  righteousness  deserve  more  merit  too. 
Why  don't  you  say  so  (in  this  ease)  ? Would  not  my 
righteousness  be  advanced  if  I can  encourage  them  in 
righteousness  ? 

After  Motse  had  paid  Kimg  Shang  Kuo  a %dsit,  Kiing 
Shang  Kuo  recommended  him  to  the  Lord  of  Yiieh.  The 
Lord  of  Yiieh  was  greatly  pleased,  saying  to  Knng  Shang 
Kuo : Sir,  if  you  can  induce  Motse  to  come  to  Yiieh  and 

instruct  me  I shall  oSer  him  five  hundred  li  square  of  the 
land  lying  in  the  former  state  of  Wu.'"  Kimg  Shang  Kuo 
promised  to  try  and  so  fifty  wagons  were  made  ready  to 
go  to  Lu  and  welcome  Motse.  (Kung  Shang  Kuo)  told  him : 
''  When  I tried  to  presuade  the  Lord  of  Yiieh  with  your 
principles  he  wms  quite  pleased  and  said  to  me  that  if  I could 
induce  you  to  come  to  Yiieh  and  instruct  him,  he  would 
offer  you  five  hundred  li  square  of  the  land  lying  in  the  former 
state  of  Wu."  Motse  said  to  Kung  Shang  Kuo : As  you 
observe  it,  what  is  the  intention  of  the  Lord  of  Yiieh  ? If 
the  Lord  of  Yiieh  will  listen  to  my  word  and  adopt  my  way, 


LWB  QUESTION 


251 


I shall  come,  asking  only  for  food  according  to  the  capacity 
of  my  stomaeln  and  clothing  according  to  the  stature  of 
my  body.  I shall  just  be  one  of  the  ministers.  'WTiat  is  the 
use  of  any  commission  ? On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Lord  of 
Yiieh  will  not  listen  to  my  word  and  adopt  my  way  and 
I should  go  nevertheless,  I should  then  be  selling  my  righteous^ 
ness.  As  for  selling  righteousness  I could  very  well  do  it 
in  China,  why  should  I then  go  out  to  Yiieh  ? ^ 

Motse  was  visiting  Wei  Yixeh.^  The  latter  asked  : ''  Now 
that  you  have  seen  the  gentlemen  of  the  four  quarters,  what 
would  you  say  is  the  most  urgent  enterprise  ? ” Motse 
replied  : Upon  entering  a coimtry  one  should  locate  the  need 
and  work  on  thah.  If  the  country  is  upset  in  confusion, 
teach  them  with  the  (doctrines  of)  Exaltation  of  the  Virtuous 
and  Identification  with  the  Superior.  If  the  country  is  in 
poverty,  teach  them  with  Economy  of  Expenditures  and 
Simplicity  in  Funeral  If  the  country  is  indulging  in  music 
and  wine,  teach  them  with  Condemnation  of  Music  and 
Anti-fatalism.  If  the  country  is  insolent  and  without 
propriety,  teach  them  to  reverence  Heaven  and  worship 
the  spirits.®  If  the  country  is  engaged  in  conquest  and 
oppression,  teach  them  with  Universal  Love  and  Condemnation 
of  Offensive  War.  Hence  we  say,  one  should  locate  the  need 
and  work  on  that, 

Motse  had  recommended  Ts’ao  Kungtse  to  Sung,  He 

^ Yiieii  was  on  the  southern  border  of  China.  It  was  of  barbarian  origin, 
too.  Cf.  the  Sketch  Map  appended  in  Motse,  the  Neglected  Rival  of 
Confucius. 

^ Wei  yiieh  is  a disciple  of  Motse. 

'**  This,  of  course,  refers  to  the  two  doctrines  expounded  in  the  Chapters  on 
“ Will  of  Heaven and“  On  Ghost  **. 


252 


THl  WOEKS  OF  MOTSE 


returned,  in  tliree  years  and  saw  Motse,  saying : When 
I first  came  to  your  scitool  I had  to  wear  short  jackets  and 
eat  vegetable  soup.  Even  this  I could  not  have  in  the  evening 
if  I had  had  it  in  the  morning.  And  I had  nothing  to  offer 
and  sacrifice  to  the  ghosts  and  spirits.  Now,  on  your  account 
my  family  has  become  better  oil.  And  I could  respectfully 
offer  sacrifice  and  worship  ghosts  and  spirits  at  home.  Yet 
several  members  of  my  household  died  off,  the  six  animals 
do  not  breed,  and  I have  myself  been  troubled  with  ailments. 
I doubt  if  your  way  is  after  ail  to  be  adopted.'"  Motse 
said  : This  is  not  fair.  For  what  the  ghosts  and  spirits  desire 
of  man  is  that  when  in  high  rank  and  receiving  much  emolu- 
ment, he  give  up  his  position  in  favour  of  the  virtuous  ; that 
when  possessing  much  wealth  he  share  it  with  the  poor. 
How  can  the  ghosts  and  spirits  merely  desire  to  snatch 
food  and  drink  ? ^ Now,  when  in  high  rank  and  receiving 
much  emolument  you  did  not  give  up  your  position  in  favour 
of  the  virtuous.  This  is  your  first  step  to  bad  fortune. 
Possessing  much  wealth  you  did  not  share  it  with  the  poor. 
This  is  your  second  step  towards  misfortune.  Now  you 
serve  the  ghosts  and  spirits  by  merely  offering  them  sacrifice  ; 
and  you  wonder  whence  come  all  the  ailments.  This  is  like 
shutting  one  out  of  a hundred  gates  and  wondering  whence 
the  thieves  entered.  How  can  you  invoke  ghosts  and  spirits 
for  blessing  like  this  ? 

The  master  of  sacrifice  of  Lu  offered  one  pig  and  asked 
for  a hundred  blessings.  Upon  hearing  of  it  Motse  said : 
This  cannot  be  done.  To  give  others  little  but  to  expect 
much  from  others  would  make  them  afraid  of  gifts.  Now 

^ This  refers  to  material  offerings. 


WS  QUESTION 


253 


one  pig  is  offered  and  a liundred  blessings  are  asked  of  tbe 
ghosts  and  spirits.  Tliey  would  be  quite  afraid  of  a sacrifice 
of  oxen  and  slieep.  Anciently,  when  the  sage-kings 
worshij>ped  the  ghosts  and  spirits,  they  just  offered  them 
sacrifice  ami  that  %vas  all.  One  would  be  better  off  to  remain 
poor  than  become  rich  by  offering  a pig  for  sacrifice  and 
asking  for  a hundred  blessings, 

P'eiig  Clding  Shengtse  ^ said : The  past  can  be  known, 
the  future  cannot/'  Motse  said : Suppose  your  parents 
met  with  misfortune  a hundred  li  away.  And  there  was 
just  the  margin  of  a single  day.  If  they  could  be  reached 
they  would  live,  if  not  they  would  die.  Here  are  a strong 
wagon  and  an  excellent  horse,  and  also  a bad  horse  and  a 
square-wheeled  cart.  And  you  are  allowed  to  choose.  Which 
would  you  take  ? It  was  replied  that  the  excellent  horse  and 
the  strong  wagon  would  of  course  make  for  a more  speedy 
journey.  Motse  said  : How  then  is  the  future  not  knowable  ? ^ 

Meng  Shan  ^ praised  Prince  Tse  Lii,  saying  ; Formerly, 
in  the  uprising  of  Po  Kung,  Prince  Tse  Lii  was  held  captive. 
With  axes  around  his  waist  and  spears  pointing  at  his  heart, 
Po  Kung  told  him  to  be  Lord  and  live  or  refuse  and  die. 
Prince  Tse  Lu  said  to  him,  * What  an  insult  to  me.  You 
have  killed  my  parents  and  now  bait  me  with  the  state  of 
Ch'u.  If  it  is  not  righteous  I would  not  even  take  the  whole 
empire,  to  say  nothing  of  the  state  of  Ch’u.’  Thus  he  refused.^ 

^ Peng  Ch’ing  Shengtse  is  perhaps  also  a disciple  of  Motse. 

^ The  Chinese  text  here  is  not  so  clear  and  dednite.  But  this  seems  to  be 
the  idea  of  the  concluding  question. 

^ Meng  Shan  is  a follower  of  Motse. 

^ According  to  Tso  Ch'iu  Ming's  “ Commentary  of  Spring  and  Autumn  ", 
or  Tea  Chum.  the  Prince  thereupon  lost  his  life. 


254 


THE  WORKS  OF  MOTSE 


Wasn’t  Prince  Tse  M magnaiiimoiis  ? ” Motse  said : 
What  he  did  was  indeed  difficult,  but  hardly  magnanimous. 
If  he  thought  the  Lord  had  gone  astray  from  the  Tao,  why 
not  accept  the  ofier  and  undertake  the  government  himseli  ? 
If  he  thought  Po  Kung  was  uni’ighteous,  why  not  accept 
the  Lordship  also,  execute  Po  Kung,  and  then  return  the 
Lordship  to  the  Lord  ? Therefore  I say  what  he  did  was  indeed 
difficult,  but  hardly  magnanimous. 

Motse  sent  Sheng  Gho  ^ to  serve  Hsiang  Tse  Niu.  Hsiang 
Tse  Niu  invaded  Lu  three  times,  and  Sheng  Cho  was  three 
times  with  him.  Hearing  of  this,  Motse  sent  Kao  Suntse  to 
call  him  back,  saying:  I sent  Cho  there  in  order  to  cure 
pride  and  regulate  insolence.  No'w,  Cho  draws  a large  salary 
and  flatters  his  master.  His  master  invaded  Lu  three  times 
and  he  was  with  him  every  time.  This  is  like  whipping 
a horse  by  its  martingale.^  I have  heard  that  to  preach 
righteousness  but  do  it  not  is  intentional  commitment  of 
wrong.  It  is  not  that  Cho  is  ignorant.  It  is  a case  of  victory 
of  emolument  over  righteousness. 

Formerly  the  people  of  Ch’u  and  the  people  of  Yiieh  had 
a battle  on  the  River.^  The  people  of  Ch’u  were  with  the 
stream  in  their  advance  but  against  it  in  their  retreat.  lr¥hen 
success  was  in  sight  they  advanced.  But  when  defeat  was 
confronting  them  they  found  it  very  difficult  to  retreat.  On 
the  contrary  the  people  of  Yiieh  advanced  upstream  but 
retreated  downstream.  When  success  was  in  sight  they  would 

^ Sheng  Cho,  a follower  of  Motse, 

2 This  is  a figure  meaning  that  instead  of  urging  the  man  forward  it  puts 
a stop  to  his  advance,  in  virtue,  of  course. 

3 The  Yangtse  River  is  often  called  “ the  River ''  in  China. 


LU^S  QUESTION 


255 


advance.  And  wlien  defeat  was  confronting  them  they 
could  easily  retreat.^ 

With  this  advantage  the  people  of  Yiieh  greatly  defeated 
the  people  of  Cli’u.  Kiing  Shutse^  came  south  from.  Lu 
to  Clihi,  and  began  making  implements  for  naval  warfare  which 
consisted  of  grappling  hooks  and  rams.  When  the 
were  retreating  they  used  the  hooks.  And  when 
were  advancing  they  employed  the  rams.  And  the  weapons 
were  made  according  to  the  length  of  these  hooks  and 
The  weapons  of  Ch’n  thus  were  all  standardized, 
of  Yiieh  wexe  not.  And,  with  this  advantage,  the 
of  Ch^n  greatly  defeated  the  people  of  Yiieh.  Kung  Shutse 
was  proud  of  his  cleverness  and  asked  Motse : There 

are  the  implements  for  grappling  and  ramming  in  my  boats 
of  war.  Do  you  have  such  a device  in  your  righteousness  ? ’ 
Motse  said : The  grappling  and  ramming  device  in  my 
righteousness  is  more  excellent  than  your  implements  in  the 
boats  of  war.  In  my  scheme,  I pull  with  love  and 
with  respect.  If  you  do  not  pull  with  love  there  can 
no  intimacy.  If  you  do  not  push  with  respect  there 
be  rapid  desecration.  And  desecration  without  real  intimacy 
will  soon  end  in  separation.  Therefore  mutual  love  and 
mutual  respect  mean  really  mutual  benefit.  Now  you 
people  up  to  stop  their  retreat,  but  they  would  also 
you  up  and  stop  your  retreat.  You  push  people 
stop  their  advance,  but  they  would  also 
stop  your  advance.  The  mutual 


^ For  the  geographical  situation  of  these  two  states  consult  the  Sketch 
Map  appended  in  Motse,  the  Neglected  Rival  of  Confucius* 

2 Kung  Shu  Pan  is  a mechanical  inventor  of  renown  of  the  time. 


256 


THE  WORKS'  Of  MOTSE 


just  mutual  injury.  Therefore  the  device  of  pulling  and 
pushing  in  my  righteousness  is  more  excellent  than  the 
iniplements  of  pulling  and  pushing  in  }mir  boats  of  war. 

Kuiig  Shutse  constructed  a bird  from  bamboo  and  wood  and 
when  it  was  completed  he  flew  it.  It  stayed  up  (in  the  air) 
for  three  days.^  Kung  Shutse  was  proud  of  his  supreme  skill. 
Motse  said  to  him : Your  accomplishment  in  constructing  a bird 
does  not  compare  with  that  of  the  carpenter  in  making  a 
linch-pin.  In  a short  while  he  could  cut  out  the  piece  of  wood 
of  three  inches.  Yet  it  would  carry  a load  of  fifty  shih.^ 
For,  any  achievement  that  is  beneficial  to  man  is  to  be  said 
to  be  skilful,  and  an}i;hing  not  beneficial  is  said  to  be  clumsy. 

Kung  Shutse  confessed  to  Motse : Before  I saw  you,  I 
wished  to  take  Sung.  Since  I have  seen  you,  even  if  Sung 
were  offered  me  I would  not  take  it  if  it  is  imrighteous.'' 
Motse  said : Before  you  saw  me  you  wished  to  take 
Sung.  Since  you  have  seen  me  even  if  Sung  were  offered 
you  you  would  not  take  it  if  it  is  unrighteous.  This  means, 
I have  given  you  Sung.  If  you  engage  yourself  in  doing 
righteousness,  I shall  yet  give  you  the  whole  workl.^ 

^ Tins  short  l)assage  has  sometimes  been  ref€?rred  to  as  a,  record  of 
invention  of  the  flying  machine  by  the  Chinese. 

^ One  shih  ^ — 120  chin  Jf' ; the  latter  is  eqnal  to  1 .\  Ib. 

® This  paragraph  comes  more  properly  at  the  end  of  the  next  chapter. 
At  any  rate  the  reference  is  to  that  event. 


CHAPTER  L 
KuKa  Shit 

Kung  Sliu  Pan  liad  completed  the  construction  of  Cloud- 
ladders  for  Oli'u  and  was  going  to  attack  Sung  witk  tkem. 
Motse  lieard  of  it  and  set  out  from  Ck’i.  He  walked  ten  days 
and  ten  iiiglits  ^ and  arrived  at  Ying.^  He  saw  Kung  Sku  Pan. 
Tke  latter  asked  him  what  he  wanted  of  him.  Motse  said : 
Some  one  in  the  north  has  humiliated  me.  I would  like  to  have 
you  kiii  him.  Kung  Shu  Pan  was  displeased.  Motse 
persisted,  offering  him  ten  chin.®  Finally  Kung  Shu  Pan 
said : My  principle  is  incompatible  with  murdering 

people/^ 

Thereupon  Motse  rose  and  bowed  twice  ^ and  spoke : 
Now,  let  me  explain  myself.  While  in  the  north  I heard 
you  were  building  ladders  to  attack  Sung.  Now,  of  what 
is  Sung  guilty  ? The  state  of  Ching  ^ has  land  to  spare 
but  is  short  of  people.  To  destroy  what  is  scarce  in  order 
to  strive  for  what  is  already  plenty  cannot  be  said  to  be 
wise.  Since  Sung  is  innocent,  to  attack  it  cannot  be  said 
to  be  magnanimous.  To  fail  to  make  an  effort  according  to 
what  you  know  cannot  be  said  to  be  loyal.  To  make  the  effort 
without  obtaining  (the  desired  result)  cannot  be  said  to  be 
effective.  To  hold  a principle  that  forbids  the  killing  of 

^ The  same  tale  is  told  in  some  other  works.  It  was  said  that  Motse  had 
to  tear  parts  of  his  garment  to  wrap  up  his  feet  for  this  continuous 
long  waik- 

^ Ying  is  the  capital  of  Ch'u,  in  what  is  now  called  Hupei  Province. 

® Supra,  p.  214,  note  2. 

^ This  is  an  expression  of  apology. 

® Ching  and  Ch’u  are  two  names  for  the  same  state. 


258 


THE  WORKS  OE  MOTSE 


few  blit  allows  that  of  many  cannot  be  said  to  be  under- 
standing  tbe  fundamental  categories. 

Kung  Siiu  Pan  became  convinced.  Motse  urged  furtber : 
Then  wby  would  you  not  stop  it  ? Kung  Sliu  Pan  said  that 
could  not  be  done  as  be  bad  abeady  promised  tbe  Lord.  Motse 
said  : Wby  not  then  present  me  to  tbe  Lord  ? Kung  Sbu 
Pan  agreed. 

Motse  saw  tbe  Lord  and  said : Suppose  there  is  a man  wbo, 
putting  aside  bis  elegant  carriage,  desires  to  steal  bis  neigb- 
bour’s  shattered  sedan ; putting  aside  bis  embroidery  and 
finery,  desires  to  steal  bis  neighbour's  short  Jacket ; putting 
aside  bis  meat  and  grains  desires  to  steal  bis  neighbour's 
busks.  What  kind  of  a man  would  this  be  ? Tbe  Lord  said 
that  be  must  be  suffering  from  kleptomania.  Motse  con- 
tinued : Tbe  land  of  Cbing  amounts  to  five  thousand  li  square 
while  that  of  Sung  is  only  five  hundred,  this  is  similar  to  tbe 
contrast  between  the  elegant  carriage  and  tbe  shattered  sedan. 
Cbing  possesses  Yun  Meng  which  is  full  of  rhinoceroses  and 
deer.  Tbe  fish,  tortoises  and  crocodiles  in  tbe  Yangtse 
and  tbe  Han  Rivers  are  the  richest  in  tbe  empire.  While 
Sung  is  said  to  possess  not  even  pheasants,  rabbits,  or  foxes. 
This  is  similar  to  tbe  contrast  between  meat  and  grains 
and  busks.  In  Cbing  there  are  tall  pmes,  spruces,  cedars, 
and  camphor  trees.  While  Sung  has  no  tall  trees  at  all 
This  is  similar  to  tbe  contrast  between  embroidery  and  finery 
and  tbe  short  Jacket.  When  your  ministers  and  generals 
set  out  to  attack  Sung,  it  seems  to  me  there  is  tbe  same 
analogy.  I can  see,  my  Lord,  you  will  be  violating  righteous- 
ness to  no  advantage. 

Tbe  Lord  said : That  is  all  very  well.  But  Kung  Sbu 


KUNG  SHU 


259 


Pan  has  already  constructed  the  Cloud-ladders  for  me,  and 
I must  capture  Sung.”  And  he  turned  to  Kung  Shu  Pan. 

Motse  untied  his  belt  and  laid  out  a city  with  it,  and  used 
a small  stick  for  weapon.  Kung  Shu  Pan  set  up  nine  different 
machines  of  attack.  Motse  repulsed  him  nine  times.  Kung 
Shu  Pan  was  at  an  end  with  his  machines  of  attack  while 
Motse  was  far  from  being  exhausted  in  defence. 

Kung  Shu  Pan  felt  embarrassed  and  declared : ‘’I  know 
how  I can  put  you  down,  but  I would  not  tell.”  Motse  also 
said  : ""I  know  how  you  can  put  me  down,  but  I would  not 
tell.”  The  Lord  of  Ch’u  asked  what  it  was.  Motse 
replied : Kung  Shutse’s  idea  is  just  to  have  me  murdered. 
(Apparently)  when  I was  murdered,  Sung  would  be  powerless 
at  defence.  And  she  would  be  subject  to  your  attack.  How- 
ever, my  disciples  Ch’in  Hua  Li  and  others  numbering  three 
hundred  are  already  armed  with  my  implements  of  defence 
waiting  on  the  city  wall  of  Sung  for  the  bandits  from  Ch’u. 
Though  I be  murdered,  you  cannot  exhaust  (the  defence 
of  Simg).  The  Lord  of  Ch’u  said : ‘‘  Well,  then  let  us  not 
attack  Sung  any  more.” 

On  his  way  back,^  Motse  passed  through  Sung.  It  was 
raining  and  he  sought  shelter  in  a pass.  But  the  guard  of 
the  pass  would  not  let  him  in.  Thus  it  is  said  : ‘‘  The  merit 
of  the  man  who  cultivates  himself  before  the  spirits  ^ is  not 
recognized  by  the  multitude.  On  the  other  hand,  he  who 
strives  in  the  open  is  recognized.” 

1 Back  to  Ch'i  or  Lu.  Cf.  discussion  on  this  point  in  Motse,  the  Neglected 
Rival  of  Oonfticius,  chap,  ii. 

® That  is,  in  the  dark,  in  secrecy. 


INDEX 


Aboriginal  tribe,  64  note  3 
Admonition,  89 
Adversity  {see  Calamity),  66 
Affection,  79,  SI,  87 
Ai,  Lord  of  Ln,  ig  210 

Ai  Ling,  Pf,  105 
Amusements,  20,  21 
AiiaUcls  jiJil  Ig',  101  note  2,  203 
note  2,  209  note  6,  210  note  i, 
216  note  2 ■ 

“ Ancestor  Worship,**  63  note  3 
Ancestral  temple,  11,  166,  196 
Announcement  about  Drunken- 
ness ’*  fg  |§,  106  note  1 
“ Announcement  of  Chung  Hui  ” 
M ± 1S7,  192,  197 

" Announcement  of  Tang  ’*  fg, 
94  note  I 

Anxiety,  causes  of,  17  ff. 
Application,  of  punishment,  64 
Archery,  241 
dLpfjLovtr}^  26  note  2 
Armoury,  20 
Attack  111,  113 

Bamboos  and  silk,  61,  92,  157,  167, 
192,  196,  226 
Barbarians,  113 
Bath,  for  sacrifice,  63,  142 
Befriending  the  Learned,  1 ff . 
Benefactor,  to  be  reported,  73 
Benefilt,  44,  66,  81,  87,  88,  117,  176 ; 
consequence  of  universal  love,  88  ; 
how  procured,  115 
Blind,  the,  107,  158,  225 
Burial  of  the  dead,  92  note  1 


Calamity  {see  adversity),  18,  81 ; 

major  ones,  81,  87  ; caused  hy 
lack  of  love,  87,  88  ; consequence 
of  partiality,  89  ; root  of,  109 
Cannibal  tribe,  133,  246  f. 

Capable,  the,  to  be  employed,  30, 
36 

Ch*ang  Earl,  34  note  3 

Ch*angFu^ 

Ch’ang  Liu  Shuo  ^ ;jJP  ^,10 
Chang  Wu 

Ch’ang  Yang  ^ j^,  50 
Chao,  Lord  of  Ch*u,^  Hg  3E»  243 
Chao,  state  of,  106 
Chariot,  103,  106,  108,  171,  172 
Ch’en,  state  of,  |^,  104,  209,  210 
Cheng,  state  of,  221,  244,  245 

Ch’eng  Ji^,  102  note  1 
Ch’eng,  King  of  Chou,  J§f|  ^ 3E^ 
29,  68  note  I 

Ch’eng  Fan  ^ or  Ch’engtse 

^ -y*,  28,  29,  237,  238 
Ch’eng  Huang  ^ 113 

Chi  46,  46 
Ch’i  181,  212 
Chi,  district  of,  ^ ^jf[,  86 

Chi,  Baron,  ^ 233,  234 

Chi  River  84 

Ch’i,  ML,  113 
Chi  Ch’in  ^ 10 

Ch’i  Chou  ^,185 
Chi  Lu  ^ jjg-  {see  Tse  Lu) 

Chi  Sun  ^ ^,209 


INDEX 


Sun  Shao  ^ ^ 221 

’i  State  of,  SO,  103,  104,  105, 
110,  114,  128,  208,  209,  210, 
,222,227,228,243,257 
Tiao  ^ 211 Spring  and 

Autumn  of,  165 

35  ^,203,  204 
Tse:^ 

Chieh  3,  10,  16,  20,  28,  29  note 
41,  45,  53,  111,  112,  132,  138, 
148,  154,  171,  180,  183,  187,  190, 
192,  194,  195,  197,  199,  224,  234, 
236, 238,  243 

Chien,LordofYen,^  ^ ^,163 
Chill  65  note  2 
Kuo  ^ g,  11 
Po  Yao  -fjg  or  Chih 
Po  ^ fg , 10,  105,  106,  244 
CtihruYiij*  ^ ^,213 

K’ig|  ^ ^ 

State  of,  103,  106,  110, 


Ch’ing  CM  ^ gi,  20 
Ch  intse  , or  Ch’in  Hua  M 

^ ?t  i[,  12,  218,  259 
“ Chiu  Chao  ” |g,  29 

Ch’iung,  Mt.,  g lij,  130 
Chou  Dynasty  note  2,  41 

note  1,  113,  166,  167,  170,  197, 
213 ; Spring  and  Autumn  of,  162 
Chou,  Duke  @]  9,  210,  226, 233 

13  li>  13  note  2,  125 

note  1 

Chow  If,  3,  10,  16,  20,  41,  45,  63, 
86,  111,  112,  113,  132,  138,  148, 
149,  154,  165,  166,  171,  183,  187, 
190,  192,  194,  195,  197,  199,  224, 
233, 234,  236,  238,  243 
Chu  Lin  ^ fjf;,  105 
Ch’u  River  jf;,  85 

Ch’u  state  of  (see  Ching),  4 note 
I,  85,  96  note  1,  105,  110,  114, 
128,  133,  153,  214,  219,  220, 

223,  243,  253,  264,  255,  257 
Chu  Yung  |g  112 

of,  §•,  104 

Men,”  |g  42;  “Shu 
S 62;  "Hsiang 

men,"  fg  65 
Chuang,  Lord  of  Cb’i,  # ffi 
164 

Chuang,  Lord  of  Ch’u,  ^ ^ 3E, 


TseYi^t  ^ «,163 
in  Pen  Wei  Lu  ^ 
^ 33  note  4 

:,  Minister,  4-  ^ 10 


INBIX 


263 


Ch'uBg,  Btike,  ^11  10»  172 

Okung  Hsliig  ifi  I'f . 106,  24.4 
Chisiig  Hsiiig  Yin  .ff  Jif*  10 
Chung  Huel  ^iji  0 
ChuBg  LI  Clilao  11  164 

Chung  Mon  if*  #,211 
Chung  Ki#  11,216 
Clan,  how  to  put  in  order,  73 
Classics,  XIJl 
Clothing,  purpose  of,  23,  117 
Code  of  punish  Blent  ^j,  163 
Compass,  140,  149,  156 
Concubine,  19 

Confucianism,  its  nctory  orer  other 
systems  by  suppression,  xi ; 
gradation  In  love,  200,  219 ; code 
of  mourning,  200  f. ; summary 
of  Motse*s  criticism,  237  I. ; code 
of  marriage,  201 ; believes  in 
fate,  202, 234  ; encourages  music, 
202,  235,  237 ; antiquity  in 
speech  and  dress,  203,  232  I, ; 
transmission  and  no  innovation, 
203  I.,  219 ; does  not  pursue 
enemy,  204 ; duty  of  a minister, 
205 

Oonfucianist,  conduct  of,  202  f, 
Confucius  {«  Ktmg  Mo  and  Chung 
M),  representative  of  Chinese 
thought,  xi ; master  of  Ts© 
Hsia,  12  note  1 ; name  of,  206  note 
1,  210  note  1 ; as  judged  by  Yen 
Ying,  206  I. ; conduct  described, 
208  ff. ; m candidate  to  become 
emperor,  233  f. 

Confusion,  70 ; kinds  of,  79 
Consume,  19 
Consumption,  thrifty,  20 
Cotten,  83  not©  1 


Counsel,.  24 ; to  comfort  many,  68 
Courage,  96 
Criterion, -91 

Criticism,  to  be  accompanied  by 
. suggestion,  88 

Beartli  ^,  48 
Bedarations  ^,184 
Befence,  self,  .20  ■ 

Bednition,  225 
Beluge,  19,  86 

Desire,  how  obtained,  2 ; of  people 
to  be  satisfied,  70 ; satisfied  under 
wise  rule,  107 

Dei^lopymnt  of  the  Logical  Method 
in  Chinay  the,  98  note  1 
Disorder,  55,  59,  70 ; cause  to  be 
known,  78 ; caused  by  lack  of 
filial  piety,  78  ; caused  by  lack 
of  affection,  79 
District,  proper  rule  of,  57,  61 
Doctrim  of  the  Mean  # 200 

note  2 

Dragons,  111 
Dyeing,  9 ff. 

^,10,172 

Early  kings,  the,  their  administra- 
tioB  of  the  empire,  6 
Economy,  17  ff,  19,  117  ff.  ; brings 
prosperity,  27  ■ 

Emoluments,  65 

Emperor  (^ee  Son  of  Heaven), 
instructed  feudal  lords,  68 ; 
chosen  by  Heaven,  71 ; to  be 
identified  with,  74 ; the  way  of, 

94  ; sacrifices  to  Heaven,  141  f. 

Empire,  Heaven  established,  72 ; 

how  put  in  order,  75  . ■ J 

Epidemics,  63  | 


1 

■ I 

J 

’’i' 


264 


INDIX 


" Eulogy  of  Chou  ^ 47,  68 

Evil,  to  be  obstructed,  48 
Exaltation  of  the  Virtuons,  30  j 
root  of  government,  35,  36,  42, 
47,  54;  way  of  Heaven,  44 ; 
and  stability  of  state,  30 ; how 
to  multiply,  31,  36 
Excess,  leads  to  destruction,  27 ; 

indulgence  in,  22  ff. 

Existence,  to  be  proven  by  testimony 
of  senses,  161 

Fa  {see  King  Wu),  197 
Fame,  not  obtainable  by  hypocrisy, 
7 ; not  to  be  sacrificed  lightly,  8 
Famine  18;  greater  calamity 
than  loss  of  a child,  19 
Fan^,  106,  244 
Fan  Chi  She  ^ 10 

Fan  Li  H 10 

Fatalism,  destructive,  182 ; un- 
sound, 183  ; not  found  in  ancient 
books,  183  f. ; overthrows 
righteousness,  184 ; way  of  the 
wicked,  186  f.,  191,  195  i,  199 ; 
to  be  rejected,  188, 199  ; obstructs 
endeavour,  198  f. 

Favouritism,  94 
Fei  Chung  ^ 172,  233 

Fei  Kan  211 

Fei  Lien  ^ 212 

Feudal  lord,  submissive  to  Emperor, 
68 ; appointed  by  the  Three 
Ministers,  56,  60,  71 ; reported 
to  Emperor,  69  ; to  be  identified 
with,  73 

Feudal  State,  proper  rule  of,  58,  62, 
74 ; created  by  the  Three 
Ministers,  71 ; mutual  invasions, 
79,  81 ; attack  of  small  by  large, 
87 


Filial  Piety,  78,  81,  87,  95 
Filialit-y,  40 ; three  interests  of 
filial  son,  123 

Five  cardinal  relations,  97  note  1 
Five 'Grains,  18  note  1,  63,  Hi,  112, 
144,  145'  ' 

Five  Lakes,  85,  105  . 

Five  offices,  126 

Five  punisliments,  58  note  2,  64 
Five  tastes,  120 
Flying  Machine,  256 
Food,  purpose  of,  25 ; laws 
regarding,  120 

Forke,  xilfred,  xii,  212  note  6, 
243  note  3 ' 

Fortune  teller,  2.28  f. 

Four  seas,  within  the,  26 
Four  seasons,  144,  145 
Friend,  to  share  one’s  possessions 
with  others,  7 

Fu  Ch’a,  Lord  of  Wu,  1^  T ^ 
i note  5,  3 note  5,  10,  105 
Fu  Tse  p,  33,  43,  50 
Fu  Yen  f®  43 
Fu  Yiieh  f®  ig;,  12,  43,  50 
Funeral,  elaborate,  described,  125; 
cannot  enrich  the  country,  126 ; 
cannot  increase  population, 
127  ; cannot  maintain  order,  128  ; 
cannot  eliminaie  wars,  128  f. ; 
cannot  please  God  and  the  spirits, 
129 ; being  practised  by  present 
rulers,  131.;  not  way  of  sage- 
kings,  132 

Gentleman,  the,  fails  to  exalt  the 
virtuous,  49 ; understands  only 
trifles,  49  f.,  135,  145,  151,  246  ; 
likes  riches  and  honour,  52 ; dislikes 
poverty  and  humility,  52  ; objects 
to  universal  love,  83,  84 ; to 


INDEX 


265 


practise  universal  lore,  97  ; does 
not  ■ tinderstaiid  rigiiteoiisness, 
99  f,,  225  ; to  ecsndemn  olleiisive 
war,  116  ; resents  help,  225  f. 
Ghost  (sec  Spirit),  160  ff. 

God,  93, 107,  137,  159,  168,  180,  187 
Good,  to  he  encoriraged,  48  ; must 
be  useful,  89 

Good-looking,  the,  in  employment, 
41,  49  ; not  employed  by  sage- 
kings,  50  f. 

Govern,  65  note  2 

Government,  a trust  from  Heaven, 
33  note  1 ; requires  knowledge, 
42  ; three  interests  in,  124 
Governors,  less  intelligent  than 
artisans,  13  ; scholars  to  become, 
35 ; like  physicians,  78 ; three 
interests  of,  123 
Granaries,  20 
Grand  Duke  ^ 6 

“Great  Declaration'’  ^ 75, 

92,  93,  140,  187,  192,  197 
Great  men,  vessels  for  the  world,  4 
“ Great  Plan  ” ^ 64  note  2 

Han,  state  of,  106 
HanBiver3|’85,258 
Harmony,  65 ; of  Yin  and  Yang, 
26 ; between  brothers,  81  ; m 
the  empire,  107 

Heaven,  does  not  dazzle,  5 ; as 
standard  in  government,  14 ; 
desires  mutual  love,  14;  loves 
mankind  universally,  15,  139, 
145  f.,  153  f. ; sacrifice  to,  15, 
37,  63,  107,  139,  163;  blesses, 
16,  46,  86  ; punishes  16,  45,  62  f., 
93;  rewards,  44;  blessed  by 
exaltation  of  the  virtuous,  51 ; 


chose  the  ruler,  66  note  1,  59,  65, 
71,  X44;  approves,  63,  86; 
wishes  to  unify  standards,  71  ; 
rewards,  108 ; decrees,  113 ; 
discerns,  135  ; desires  righteous- 
ness, 136,  151 ; desires  life,  136  ; 
most  honourable  and  wise,  141, 
153 

Heavenly  justice,  65 
Hedonistic  Paradox,  2 note  2 
Ho  ^ (barbarian  tribe,  see  mo  |§), 
85 

Ho  In  R;»215 

Ho  Liz  of  Wu^  ^ 10,  195 

Hodous,  Lewis,  xxii 
Honmrr,  65 
Horse  play,  116,  216 
Hou  Chih  Ti  ^ J®.  85 

House,  purpose  of,  22, 117 
Household,  Chinese,  27  note  1 
Houses,  of  Ministers,  mutual  dis- 
turbance, 79 ; mutual  usurpation, 
81 ; misuse  of  small  by  large,  87 
Hsi  Chung  ^ .fifi,  203,  204 
HsiShih®  Jg,  3 
Hsia  Dynasty  X,  3 note  1, 15  note 
2,  19,  41  note  1,  112,  166,  168, 
197,213 

Hsia  name  for  Chinese,  86  note  I 
“ Hsiang  **  29 

Hsiang,  Minister  of  Chao,  ^ 

106 

“ Hsiang  Men*'  65 ; Ohii 

nien  ” gg  42  ; Shu  men  " 

Hsiang  Tse  Mu  243, 

264 

“ Hsiao  Ming"  /Jv  PJ,  142  note  1 


266 


INDEX 


Hsian  30  note  1 

Hsien  T'angtse  226 

Hsian  Tse  SMli  H ^ 213 

Hsin  tribe  of,  33  note  4 ; Prince 
of,  43,  50 
Hsing  121 

Hsinng  Li  t|  ^>114 
Hsu  Yu  ^ ^,9 
Hsuan,  King  of  Chou  jfjj  ^ 3E» 
161,  162 

Hu  232  note  1 
Hu  ^ (barbarian  tribe),  85,  104 
Hu,  Prince  of,  ^ jg  169 
Hu  Ch’ih  Hiver  Pj|  85 
Hu  Shih  ^ 

Huai  Kiver  85 
Huan,  Lord  of  Ch'i,  ^ 1, 

10,  232 

Huang  Fu  Mi  ^ -g*  |g,  43  note  4 
Huang  Huang  Obe  Hua  **  g g 
68  note  2 

Huang  River  ^ 85 

Huang  Ti  ^ 23  note  1 

“ Huang  Yi  ” ^ 147 

Hui,  Lord  of  Cb'u,  ^ ^ 3E,  223 
Huitse  of  the  South  City  |g  |jj 
H ^,208,209 
Human  nature,  55  note  1 
Hung  Yao  ^ 34,  53 

Hurricane,  as  punishment  from 
Heaven,  58,  63 

Idea,  each  man  has  bis  own,  55 
Identification  with  the  Superior, 
55  fi. ; observed  by  sage-kings, 
64,  68;  foundation  of  govern- 
ment, 69,  77  ; principle  in  govern- 


ment, 70 ; appiicable  on  either  or 
on  small  scale,  7o ; to  be  urged 
with  love,  77  ; essence  of  orderli- 
ness, 77 

Indulgence,  leads  to  destruction,  27 
Influence,  on  a state  and  on  an 
individual,  11 

“ Instructions  of  E ^ pj^  108 
note  2,  180  note  1,  180  note  4 
Intention,  214,  248 
Invention,  of  bow^,  203  ; of  armour, 
203  ; of  vehicles,  203  ; of  boats! 

OAO  ■ ■ ■ ' 


Ju  River  ^,85 
Justice,  20 

Jung,  seven  tribes  of,  ^ 130 

Jungle,  58,  62 

K’ai  Shu  tribe  of,  133 

Kan  168 
Kan,  state  of,  85 
Kan  Hsin  ^ ^,10 
K^ang,  Lord  of  Ch'i,  ^ ^ 

178 

K'ang,  Lord  of  Sung,  3E»^^ 

Kao  Chiang  jgj  10 
Kao  Shihtse  Jg  ^ 217,  218 

“K'ao  Kung  Chi"  ;£  |g, 

13  note  2 

KaoKuoPaoYeng  ® 

209 

KaoSuntflejg  ^ -5^,254 
Kao  T’ao  ^ 9,  45,  53 

Kao  Yang  1^,111 
Kao  Yen  ^ g,  lo 

Kaotse  241 


INDEX 


267 


Keng  Chu  ^ g or  Keng  Ohutse  Learned,  the,  to  be  befriended,  1 ff. ; 

IJfc  tp  Sf.  212  214  ^ introduced,  3 

KCtoSnia,  bo,  b*!,  258  Learning,  53 

Kou  Cliien,  Lord  of  Yiieh,  #g  T Legge,  James,  translation  of  Classics, 

xiii,  34  note  2,  39  note  1,  42  note 
% 43  note  1,  46  note  I,  61  note  6, 
62  note  2,  64  note  4,  66  note  1, 
6$  note  1 , 68  not©  2,  7 6 note  1 , 78 
note  1,  93  note  1,  94  note  i,  94 
note  2,  96  not©  1, 101  not©  2, 106 
note  1,  142  note  1,  147  note  1, 
149  not©  1, 168  note  1,168  note  2 
169  note  1, 180  note  1, 180  note  4, 
187  note  1,  197  note  3,  200  note 
2,  203  note  2,  209  note  6,  210 
note  1,  216  note  2,  241  note  1 
Hiei,  Lsilve,  » 43.  50 

Li  ^Ij,  244  note  1 
Li  20,  67,  76, 102, 103, 105, 114, 
243,  250,  253,  258 
U Chi  H fg,  126  note  1,  201 
note  1 

Li,  Duke,  ® ^,10 
Li,  King,  3E,  10,  16,  41,  46, 
132,  138,  148,  154,  195,  199,  224, 
236,  243 

Li,Mt.,g  ill,  43,  60 
Libation,  to  Heaven,  63 
library  of  Congress,  Washington, 
D.  C.,  xiv 

Life,  desired  by  people,  47 ; abnn- 
dant,  52  ; duration  short,  91 
ling.  Lord  of  Ch'u,  ^ M 3E» 
83,  96 

bin  121 

LoHuaLi]^  ^,221 
Loyalty,  120;  Chinese  code  of, 
Laufer,  Berthold,  xiii  40  note  1 

Laws  183  Lu,  state  of,  105,  208,  209, 


Kon  Mang  ^ 5^,  163 

Ku,  Buke  of  IVai,  ^ ^ 1^,10 

Ku  River  flJ.  yJC*  65 

Ku  Sou  ^ 210 

Ku  Su  H.,  105 

Kuan  Oh'in  Ao  ^ ^ 217 

Kuan  Chung  ^ 10 

Kuan  Ku  163,  164 

Kuei  111,  113 

Kuei  ■ CM  ■ ^ , 243 

Kuei  CM,  Mt.,  # ^ [il»  105, 130 

Kun,  Count,  ^6 

KMnWug.  §,212,213 

K’ung  Li  JL  11 » 210 

Kung  Liang  Huantse  ^ 

-y*,  227 

Kung  Mengtse  ^ 218, 

219,  230,  231,  232,  233,  234,  235, 


KMng  Mo  JL  ^ (see  Confucius), 
206,  207,  208,  209,  210,  211 
Kung  Sliang  Kuo  fSj  226, 
250 

Kung  Shutse  ^ ^ 255,  256, 

257,  268,  259 
Kuo  f[5,  102,  105 
Kuotse  *5*»  243 


268 


INDEX 


219,  221,  222,  239.  243,  247.  248, 
250,  254 

Lu  Pu  Wei  g 33  note  4 

LG  Shang  g lu 

£ii  Shift  Oh'vn  Ch'iu  R R n 

'33  B.otfe  4' 

LuiigMenfl  pg,  Ml,  85 


Magnammity  and  righteou8ne.«!s,  53, 
77,  224 ; as  basis  of  friendship, 

Malefactor,  to  be  reported,  73 
Mandate,  56,  60 
Marriage,  age  for,  118  f. 

Me  Ti,  212  note  6 
Mencius  ^ alarmed  by  rivalry 
of  Moism  to  Confucianism,  xi ; 
controversy  with  Kaotse,  241 
note  1 

MeTicius  ^ 78  note  1,  241 

note  1 

Meng  Chu  Eiver  85 

MengFen.-^  3 

Meng  Po  Ch’ang  ^ fjg  221 

Meng  Shan  [Ij,  253 
Miao  46 ; Prince  of,  64,  93,  111 
Middle  Kingdom  g,  J32 
Min,  Pass  of,  ^ g,  106 
Ministers,  to  be  unflattering,  2 ; ua- 
oompromising,  2;  stem,’  2; 
i farsighted,  2 
Mirror,  106 

Mo  |g  (barbarian  tribe,  see  Ho  &) 

104  ^ 

Wo  Ti^  S.  210  note  4.  241 
Moism,  neglected  as  formal  discipline 
M ; rival  of  Confucianism,  xi ; 


generally  followed  as  a wav  of 
Me  « China,  si;  viUHty 
ey.doucc!  l,y  present-dav  revival 
o{  interest,  vi ; as  a doctrine 
Nil ; Humnsarizedy  25!  * 

Moist  iScliool,  xil 
Moral  excellence,  32 
Motse  H jjjj. 

at  watching  silk-dycing,  9. 
tearhing  not  fancy.  75;  insisted 
on  universal  love,  80;  studious, 
226;  school.  238,  239;  sick,  240 
ilatfe.  the  Xegkefei  Jiiml  of  Oon- 
fucim,  I note  4,  2 note  1, 4 note  I 
15  note  2,  17  note  2,  22  note  l’ 
-3  note  1,  24  note  1,  66  note  1 
227  note  2,  251  note  I,  255  note  l’ 
259  note  1 

Motse  replied,  28,  89,  92.  96.  167 
214,  222,  223  ’ 

Mourning,  extended  mourning  des- 
criheft,  125  f.,  127 
Mu  103,  221 

Mu,  King  of  Chou,  ^ 3£, 

51  note  4 ' ■ . ^ 

Mo,  Lord  of  Chin,  M M & 
162,  163  . m A » 

Mu,  Wildernmn  of,  ^ 172 

^,223 

Musio,  condemnation  of,  175  ff  ^ 
Botbene&iai,  175;  not  according, 

^ sap-Idngs,  175 ; wrong,  175, 
177,  178,  180 ; prevents  produc- 
tion, 177 ; disturbs  government, 

178  ; effect  on  different  classes  of 
people,  179  f. ; encouraged  by 
Confucianism,  202,  235 
Musical  diractom,  50 
Mutual  aid,  55 


INDEX 


269 


Mutual  love,  necessary  for  order, 
78,  79 

Nan  CM 

Nan  Kuiig  K'uo  ^ ^ IS> 

Nest  Builders,  22  note  1 
NiHsi/g  ^,207 
Nine  Tribes,  105 

“ Oath  of  rang  ” 43,  93 

Ode,  12, 38,  68 

Oracle,  218 

Order,  66,  70 ; and  economy  in 
shelter,  23 ; and  economy  in 
clothing,  24 ; and  economy  in 
food,  25 ; and  economy  in 
vehicles,  26 ; secured  by  unifica- 
tion of  standards,  58 
Orphans,  89 

Pa,  state  of, 

Pao  H,  163, 164 
Pao  Shu  10 

Partial  friend,  89  f. 

Partial  ruler,  91  f. 

Partiality  in  love,  wrong,  87  ; cause 
of  calamities,  87 
Patient,  78 

Patriarch,  71,  135  ; to  he  identified 
with,  72 

PeHai;jt;;  ^,50 
Fen  a,  227 

Penal  Code  of  Lu ''  § 45, 

51,64 

P'eng  Ch7ng  Shengtse  @ ^ 
-y*,  253 

People,  blessed  by  exaltation  of  the 
virtuous,  61 
Pestilence,  63,  91 


Physician,  114,  223  ; must  know 
cause  of  ailment,  78  ; prescribing 
drugs,  103 

P*i,  Mnister,  ^ ^ ^,10 
Pi  Kan  3 

Pi  Yuan  Jp;  text  of  Molse 

inferior,  78  note  i 
Piao  Palace  ^ 112 

Platons  Dialogues,  30  note  2 
Plato's  JRepublic,  30  note  3 
Po  184 

Po  112 

Po,  Duke,  Q 206,  207,  253, 

254 

Po  Chii  105 

PoJog  ^,212 
PoYi^fg  ^,9 
PoYangf^  1^,9 
Political  Ideal,  Chinese,  33  note  1 
Popular  recommendation,  56,  60 
Population,  how  became  large,  27  I 
desired  to  be  large,  27  ; and  war, 
103,  119 ; difficult  to  increase, 
118;  and  extended  mourning, 
127 

Posterity,  92 

Praiseworthy,  what  is,  107 
Prediction,  101,  253 
Preparation,  20  f . 

Priesthood  in  Chinese  religion,  203 
note  1 

Principle,  38 
Privation,  91 

“ Proclamation  of  Tang  " ^ |§, 
43 

Produce,  19 ; production  diligent, 
20 

Proverb,  76 
FuT’ienJI  g,  162 


270 


INDIX 


Pu  T'u  Ho  ^ 1^  (barbarian 

tribe),  104 

Public  approval,  to  be  given 
prominence,  33 ; supreme  in 
community  life,  66 
Punishment,  51,  53,  57,  66,  69,  70, 
73,  76,  ill,  113,  166 
Purification,  for  sacrifice,  63 
Purposes,  117  ,•  to  be  unified,  60  f., 
65;  not  unified  at  present,  66; 
each  has  his  own,  71 ; process  of 
unification,  72  fi . ; of  the  mag- 
nanimous,  81,  87 

Rabbit  nets,  34 

Rank,  to  be  assigned  according  to 
virtue,  33 
Relationships,  59 

Relatives,  in  employment,  41,  49, 
66 ; not  employed  by  sage-kines, 
501 

Reward,  53,  57,  66,  69,  70,  73,  76 
Rich  without  merit,  the,  in  employ- 
ment, 41,  49  ; not  employed  by 
sage-kings,  50  f. 

Righteousness,  160, 239 ; degrees  in, 

98  G. ; as  standard,  136, 141, 152, 
155;  origin  of,  141;  greatest’ 
213;  in  vain,  214  1,  222  ; 
treasure  of  the  world,  216 ; to  be’ 
done  for  its  own  sake,  218,  224 ; 
most  valuable,  222  ; to  be  taught, 
248  f.  ^ 

Robbery,  caused  by  lack  of  universal 
love,  79 

Sacrifice,  to  Heaven,  15,  37,  63,  94, 
137,  153  ; five  items  of,  18 ; 
Spring  and  Autumn,  63 ; for 
blessing,  252  1 


Sage-king,  15,  38,  42,  44,  54,  64,  66 
107,  119,  121,  123,  137,  138,  U7* 
154,  160,  i(u\  166,  167,  169,  |74 
176,  183,  iS5,  100,  192,  198,  249,* 
prepared  for  famine,  19;  thrifty’ 
22,  27,  29 ; no  use  for  music, 
28  ff. ; exalted  the  virtuous,  32,/' 
36,  39,  43,  50,  76 ; Judicious,  61  ; 
understood  Will  of  Heaven,  63 ; 
observed  principle  of  Identifica’ 
tion  with  the  Superior,  67,  75 ; 
practised  universal  love,  85,  92,’ 
120 ; encouraged  early  marriage’ 
118  ; proclaimed  laws  of  economy, 
120  ff. ; practised  simplicity  In 
funeral,  130  f.  • reason  for 
praise  of,  215 
Salvation  29 
San  Yi  Sheng  Jg;  53  ; 
" Sang  Jou  ^ ^ (Sang  Yew), 
39  note  1 
Scarcity  ^,18 

Scholars,  to  exhibit  good  conduct,  6 ; 

to  be  governors,  35  ■ 
Self-contradiction,  90,  92 
Self-cultivation,  6 If. 

Seif-remindment,  51  note  2 
Seneca,  146  note  2 
Sex,  fundamental  with  nature,  27 
Sexagenary  Cycle,  170  note  I,  229 
note  1 

Shang  Dynasty  ^ (see  Yin),  3 note 
2,  16  note  2,  41  note  1,  8G,  112, 
113,  166,  168,  197 
Shang  of  Cluing  Shan  ti| 

ShangYen]^  ^.218 
She  ig,  28,  175,  235  note  1 
Shen,  Minister  of,  ^ lo 


INDEX 


Socratic  f ormtila,  30  note  1 
Solidarity,  55  note  1 
Son  of  Heaven,  108, 138 
Sophist,  17 

"‘Speech  at  Kan  ” -fl-  m>  168, 
169  note  1 

Spirits,  blessed  by  exaltation  of  the 
virtuous,  51 ; exist,  160,  165, 
167,  168,  169,  173,  234 ; reward 
virtue  and  punish  vice,  160,  162, 
170, 240, 252  ; watch  everywhere, 
165,  170  j priority  over  people, 
166 ; classification  of,  173 ; 
purpose  of  sacrifice,  173  f. 

Spring  and  Autumn,  162  note  1 
Square,  140,  150,  156 
Standard  13  note  3 ; everybody 
has  his  own,  59;  necessity  of, 
13  fi. ; difference  in,  72  ; universal 
love  as,  89 ; righteousness  as, 
136,  139,  152,  155 ; to  be  given 
by  Heaven,  137,  152;  force  as, 
139,  140,  155;  will  of  Heaven 
as,  140,  150,  156,  159 ; for 
judging  doctrines,  183  f.,  189, 
194,  217,  224 
Statecraft,  31,  32 
"Shu Ling 4>,66 
Subordinate,  32 

Suggestion,  to  go  with  criticism,  88 
Sui,  Mt.,  H lil,  114 
Sui,  Duke,  215 

Sun  Eiver  ^ tJC,  86 
Sun  Shu  ^,10 
Sun  Yi-Jang  ^ accepted 
as  authority  for  translation,  xii ; 
best  text  of  MoU%  xii,  78  note  1 


Shen  Kung  104 

note  1 

Sheng  175 

Sheng  214 

Sheng  Cho  254 

SMh  256 

Shih  1 note  2 

SMh  Chfi  -^,206 

Shih  Ghing  34  note  2,  39 

note  1,  68  note  1,  68  note  2,  94 
note  2,  95  note  1,  142  note  1,  147 
note  1,  159  note  2,  168  note  1 
Shu  Ching  @,42  note  1 , 42  note 

2,  43  note  1,  46  note  1,  52  note 
1,  52  note  2,  65  note  1,  76  note  1, 
93  note  1,  94  note  1,  94  note  2, 
106  note  1, 149  note  1, 168  note  2, 
168  note  3,  169  note  1,  180  note 
1,  180  note  4,  187  note  1,  192 
note  3,  196  note  2,  197  note  3, 
234  note  2 

""  Shu  Nien  g 52  ; Chu 
nien ''  gg  42  ; Hsiang 

men'*  65 

ShuTiaog 

Shun  9, 28, 31  note  1, 33, 35, 38, 
43,  44,  48.  49,  60,  63,  111  note  1, 
130,  132,  147,  154,  158,  165,  210, 
224,  248  ; way  of,  52 
Silk,  23,  51,  83  note  1,  145 
Simplicity  in  funeral,  123  ff. ; rules 
for,  122,  130, 134 
Six  animals,  63  note  2, 144 
Six  arts,  the,  of  Chinese  education, 
30  note  3 
Six  poets,  126 


INDEX 


Sung,  state  of,  5^,  105,  221,  256, 
257,  258,  259 ; Spring  and 
Autumn  of,  164 

Superior,  the,  32 ; to  be  imitated, 
66  f.,  60  f. ; encouragement 
elective,  83 

Superior  man,  the,  54  ; conduct  of, 
2 ; investigating  a locality,  6 ; 
the  four  qualities  of,  7 ; body  as 
vehicle  of  character,  8 ; as  friend, 
90;  struggle  among,  215  ; does 
not  create,  219 


Tao,  King  of  Chhi,  ^ ^ 

note  i 

Tax,  22,  23,  24,  37,  119 
Technique,  38 

Temperance,  brings  prosperity,  27 
Text,  adopted  for  translation,  xii 
Theft,  caused  by  lack  of  universal 
love,  70 

Three  Chin  H 244 

Three  Dynasties,  15  note  2, 16  note  1, 
38,  41,  44,  45,  123,  137,  147,  148, 
154,  160,  165,  166,  190,  194,  195, 
199,224,236,243 
Three  Rivers,  105 
Three  Tests,  183,  189,  194 
Three  worries  of  people,  176 
Ti,  eight  tribes  of,  ^ 130 

TiChuJg  U,  Mt„85 
TiehPilj^  ^,240 
T’ien  Oh’ang  W 208,  209 

T’ien  Pu  Li  I®,  li 

Tien  tse  ^ ^ (see  Son  of  Heaven 
and  Emperor),  9 note  4 
Ting  ff},  125,  177,  2i2 
Torrents,  as  punishment  from 
Heaven,  58,  63 
Tortoise,  3 
Torture,  64,  65 

Translation,  language  of,  xiii ; 
made  independently,  xii ; quota- 
tions from  the  Classics,  xiii ; text 


Ta  Tsan  ^ 171 

" Ta  Ta  " 95,  159,  167 

Tai,  -(4^  (barbarian  tribe),  85,  104 
T^ai,  Mt.,  [Jj , 84,  85,  86, 92, 105 

T'ai  Hang  ^ 212 

T’ai  Tien  ^ ^,34,  53,  113 
Talents,  hard  to  command  but 
trustworthy,  4 • 

TaUy,  90,  91 

T’ang  '^,9, 16  note  1, 20, 31  note  1, 
38, 44, 48,  49, 53, 93,  111,  112, 113, 
132,  137,  138,  147,  154,  168,  171, 
183,  184,  187,  190,  192,  194,  195, 
197,  215,  223,  224,  238,  243; 
discovered  Yi  Yin,  33,  43,  50; 
loved  people  universally,  15,  16 ; 
composed  music,  28  ; the  success- 
ful, 29  ; way  of,  62,  184  f. 

T’ang,  Uncle,  ^ 114 

T’angYangli  3^,  11 
Tao  ^ (see  Way),  63,  65,  69, 
89,  103,  144,  217,  218,  249,  254; 
to  he  taught,  62  ; of  Heaven,  142 


Trust,  38 

Ts’ai,  state  of,  104,  209,  210 

**  Tsai  Chien  ” 68  note  1 

Ts'ao  Kungtse  ^ 251 

Ts"e  1^  (see  Tse  Kung) 

Tse  Hsi  ^ 12 


27S 


f* ; chosen  by 


[versa!  Love). 


ise  Kung  ^ or  Tse  H,  209, 
210 

Tse  Lu  or  Chi  Lu  m Sg., 

209.  210 

Tse  Lii,  Prince  of  Ch’u,  ^ 

253,  254  ^ ^ -r 

Tse  River  228 

TsoChuati-^  '^,253  note  4 

Tsou,  state  of,  219 

"Tsou  Yu”  ^ 29 

Tsu  H,  163 

Tn  Po  fj^.  161,  162 
Tuan  Kan  Mu  ^ ^ 12 

T’uei  Yi  ^ g:,  10,  171 
Tufts,  J.  H.,  xiii 
T'«ng;^,131 

Tyrant.  1,  10,  24 


Vse,  89,  117,  li 
89 ; Motse  app 
useful,  89 


Vassals,  32  \ 

Vehicles  (and  boats),  pur^ 

’ “tility  of,  121  \ 

Village,  proper  rule  of,  57, 61~'  ^ 
Virtue,  way  of,  52;  rewarded,' 

Virtuous,  the.  to  be  reeommende 
Vulcan,  Cliinese,  112  noi-P  l 


Want  H,  18 

War,  condemnation  of^  98  ff 
prevents  agriculture  and  indnstrj 
101,  110;  involves  waste,  101  f. 
110  ; causes  misery,  102,  110 
chosen  benefits  of,  103;  and  popula 
tion,  103,  109 

B wish,  Way,  the  right  (see  " Tao  ”),  oi 
10,  86 ; sage-kings,  54 ; leading  to  seourity 

; the  11 


way  of,  82  f. ; prevents  calamities, 
82  f. ; exalted  by  the  benevolent, 
83 ; to  be  promoted  by  the 
superior,  97;  difBcult,  83;  im- 
practicable, 84,  92  ; not  useful, 

89,  213  f. ; objection  only  verbal, 

90,  92 ; not  realizable,  92 ; is 
natural,  83,  84 ; practised  by 
sage-kings,  85,  97;  not  to  be 
neglected,  86 


^of^m  ’ "*"lity, 

Wei,  Baron,  233 

Wei,  state  of,  |]|,  108,  210,  217, 
226,227 

Wei  Yi  ^ 11 

WeiYiieh  ll  @,251 

Wen,  lord  of  Chin,  # ^ ^ 

1.  10,  83,  96,  232 


T 


274 


fa 


sally,  15,  16;  composed  music, 
29  ; way  of,  52 


49,  B$,  85,  i2^  94  1S7, 

' 188,  147,^  1^^*  165,  167, 

’1,;^,  185,  19/195,  224,  243;  jsruler 
" OTer  'Wstern  land,  86  f. ; loved 
peopl^i^iversaliy,  15, 16 ; justice 
exai^d,  34  note  2 ; way  of,  52, 
18 

Wei;  Lord  of  Sung,  ^ ^ 

. Wen,  Prince  of  Lu  Yang,  .'g, 

]kl  916,  220,  221,  244,  245, 
246,  247 

Wen  Kiver  105 

■*  Wen  Wang  ^ 3p,  168  note  1 
Wen  Yi  ^ lo 

West  River  !§■  85 

Will  of  Heaven,  58,  112,  135  £f. ; 
identified  with,  75;  light  of 
Heaven,  72  ; obedience  procures 
rewards,  137,  138,  150;  as 
standard,  140,  150,  156,  159; 
origin  of  magnanimity  and 
righteousness,  142,  143,  144  ; 
universal  love  as,  153 
Wise  men,  way  of  the,  107, 108 
Wizard,  164 

Works  of  Moise  with  Comrmniaries^ 
thOj  xii 

Worship  of  ancestors,  113,  |65 
Wn,  King,  ^ 3£,  9,  16  note  1, 
20,  31  note  1,  38,  44,  48,  49,  53, 
86,  94,  111,  113,  132,  137,  138, 
147,  154,  158,  165,  166,  172,  183, 
187,  190,  192,  194,  195,  197,  216, 
224,  243 ; loyed  people  xmiver- 


Wn  state  of,  1,  20,  104,  209, 
243,  250 

Wn  Ch'i  ^ 4 

Wu  Kuan  181 

248,  249,  250 

Wu  Matse  ^ ^ 212,  213, 

214,  216,  219 

Wu  Ting  ^ y,  discovered  Fu 
Yueh,  43,  50 
WuTuan^  ^,10 

Tang  or  Yang  Chu  ^ xi 
Yang  Huo  ^ 210 

Yangtze  Eiver  ^ ^ 85, 

254  note  3,  258 

Yao  28, 31  note  1,  35, 38,  44,  45, 
48,  49,  53,  130,  132,  147,  154,' 
158,  165,  224 ; discovered  Shun, 
33,43,60;  way  of,  52  ; practised 
economy,  120  f. 

Yellow  River  ^ Jpf,  85 
Yen  ^ (barbarian  tribe),  85,  104 
YenCh'angfg  U 

Yentse  ^ ^ or  Yen  Ying  § 

206,  207,  208 
**  Yi  J[||,  95  note  1 
Yi  55  note  2 
Yi  ^ , see  Yi  Yen 
Yi  203 
Yi  4 note  2 
Yi  212 

Yi,  Duke  of  Pu,  ^ ^ ^,10 
Yi,  nine  tribes  of,  130 


INDEX 


YiChih-p-  ^,«eYiYeB 
YiCh’tt^  11,133 
Yi  Chung  of  the  State  of  Jung 


38,;44,'45,  45  note  2,  48,  49,  53, 
85,  93,  111,  130,  132,  137,-138, 
147,  154,  158,  166,  168,  194, 
195,  224,  238,  243 ; loved  people 
universally,  15,  16;  Deluge,  19; 
reduced  Flood,  46  ; way  of,  62 
Yu  ff,  203,  204 
Yii  28,  175 
Yu  Dynasty  166,  197 

YuK’o^  ^,17  note  2 
Yu  Ton  River  85 

Yu  Tu  ^ fP,  120 
Yuan  Palace  ^ ^,111 
Yuan  River  TfC,  85 

Yfieh  state  of,  2 note  1,  85,  90, 
96,  103,  104,  105,  110,  114,  128, 
133,  163,  209,  243,  260,  251,  254, 
266 

Yun  Meng  ^ 268 


YiK’uei^  i!.  114 

^,125  note  1,201  note  2 
Yi  Ya  ^ 3^,  12 
Yi  Yin  ^ 9,  33  note  4,  43, 

50,  53,  223 

Yin  and  Yang  |^,  26,  144 
Yin  Dynasty  ^ (see  Shang),  19, 
29,  113,  148,  165,  213 
Yin  Fangio  33^.33 
Ying  gp,  257 
Yu  Chu  114 

Yu,  King,  ^ 3E,  10,  16,  41,  45, 
132,  138,  148,  154,  195,  199,  224, 
236,  243 

Yu  H,  9,  16  note  1,  31  note  1,  33, 


Printed  by  Stephen  Austin  and  Sons,  Ltd.,  Hertford. 


