.mw-parser-output .wst-anchor:target{background-color:rgba(100,149,237,0.1);color:var(--color-base,#202122);outline:1px solid cornflowerblue}1. Pleasant is the semicircular water,
And we gather the cress about it.
The marquis of Lû is coming to it,
And we see his dragon-figured banner.
His banner waves in the wind,
And the bells of his horses tinkle harmoniously.
Small and great,
All follow the prince in his progress to it.

2. Pleasant is the semicircular water,
And we gather the pondweed in it.
The marquis of Lû has come to it,
With his horses so stately.
His horses are grand;
His fame is brilliant.
Blandly he looks and smiles;
Without any impatience he delivers his instructions.

3. Pleasant is the semicircular water,
And we gather the mallows about it.
The marquis of Lû has come to it,
And in the college he is drinking.
He is drinking the good spirits.
May there be ​given to him such old age as is seldom enjoyed!
May he accord with the grand ways,
So subduing to himself all the people!

4. Very admirable is the marquis of Lû,
Reverently displaying his virtue,
And reverently watching over his deportment,
The pattern of the people.
With great qualities, both civil and martial,
Brilliantly he affects his meritorious ancestors.
In everything entirely filial,
He seeks the blessing that is sure to follow.

5. Very intelligent is the marquis of Lû,
Making his virtue illustrious.
He has made this college with its semicircle of water,
And the tribes of the Hwâi will submit to him.
His martial-looking tiger-leaders
Will here present the left ears (of their foes).
His examiners, wise as Kâo-yâo,
Will here present the prisoners.

6. His numerous officers,
Men who have enlarged their virtuous minds,
With martial energy conducting their expedition,
Will drive far away those tribes of the east and south.
Vigorous and ​grand,
Without noise or display,
Without appeal to the judges,
They will here present (the proofs of) their merit.

7. How they draw their bows adorned with bone!
How their arrows whiz forth!
Their war chariots are very large!
Their footmen and charioteers never weary!
They have subdued the tribes of Hwâi,
And brought them to an unrebellious submission.
Only lay your plans securely,
And all the tribes of the Hwâi will be won.

8. They come flying on the wing, those owls,
And settle on the trees about the college;
They eat the fruit of our mulberry trees,
And salute us with fine notes.
So awakened shall be those tribes of the Hwâi.
They will come presenting their precious things,
Their large tortoises, and their elephants' teeth,
And great contributions of the southern metals.
