King Wăn is on high.
Oh! bright is he in heaven.
Although Kâu was an old country,
The (favouring) appointment lighted on it recently.
Illustrious was the House of Kâu,
And the
​appointment of God came at the proper season.
King Wăn ascends and descends
On the left and the right of God.

Full of earnest activity was king Wăn,
And his fame is without end.
The gifts (of God) to Kâu
Extend to the descendants of king Wăn⟨;—
To the descendants of king Wăn⟩,
In the direct line and the collateral branches for a hundred generations.
All the officers of Kâu
Shall (also) be illustrious from age to age.

They shall be illustrious from age to age,
Zealously and reverently pursuing their plans.
Admirable are the many officers,
Born in this royal kingdom.
The royal kingdom is able to produce them,
The supporters of (the House of) Kâu.
Numerous is the array of officers,
And by them king Wăn enjoys his repose.

Profound was king Wăn;
Oh! continuous and bright was his feeling of reverence.
Great is the appointment of Heaven!
There were the descendants of (the sovereigns of) Shang—
The
descendants of the sovereigns of Shang
Were in number more ​than hundreds of thousands.
But when God gave the command,
They became subject to Kâu.

They became subject to Kâu,
(For) the appointment of Heaven is not unchangeable.
The officers of Yin, admirable and alert,
Assist at the libations in our capital.
They assist at those libations,
Always wearing the hatchet-figures on their lower garments and their peculiar cap.
O ye loyal ministers of the king,
Ever think of your ancestor!

Ever think of your ancestor,
Cultivating your virtue,
Always seeking to accord with the will (of Heaven):—
So
shall you be seeking for much happiness,
Before Yin lost the multitudes,
(Its kings) were the correlates of God.
Look to Yin as a beacon;
The great appointment is not easily preserved.

The appointment is not easily (preserved):—
Do
not cause your own extinction.
Display and make bright your righteousness and fame,
And look at (the fate of) Yin in the light of Heaven.
The doings of high Heaven
Have neither sound nor ​smell.
Take your pattern from king Wăn,
And the myriad regions will repose confidence in you.
