Great is God,
Beholding this lower world in majesty.
He surveyed the four quarters (of the kingdom),
Seeking for some one to give establishment to the people.
Those two earlier dynasties
Had failed to satisfy him with their government;
So, throughout the various states,
He sought and considered
For one on whom he might confer the rule.
Hating all the great states,
He turned his kind regards on the west,
And there gave a settlement (to king Thâi).

(King Thâi) raised up and removed
The dead trunks and the fallen trees.
He dressed and regulated
The bushy clumps and the (tangled) rows.
He opened up and cleared
The tamarisk trees and the stave trees.
He hewed and thinned
The mountain mulberry trees.
God having brought about the removal thither of this intelligent ruler,
The Kwan hordes fled away.
Heaven had raised up a helpmeet for him,
And the appointment he had received was made sure.

God surveyed the hills,
Where the oaks and the buckthorn were thinned,
And paths made through the firs and cypresses.
God, who had raised the ​state, raised up a proper ruler for it,—
From
the time of Thâi-po and king Kî (this was done).
Now this king Kî
In his heart was full of brotherly duty.
Full of duty to his elder brother,
He gave himself the more to promote the prosperity (of the country),
And secured to him the glory (of his act).
He accepted his dignity and did not lose it,
And (ere long his family) possessed the whole kingdom.

This king Kî
Was gifted by God with the power of judgment,
So that the fame of his virtue silently grew.
His virtue was highly intelligent,—
Highly
intelligent, and of rare discrimination;
Able to lead, able to rule,
To rule over this great country;
Rendering a cordial submission, effecting a cordial union.
When (the sway) came to king Wăn,
His ​virtue left nothing to be dissatisfied with,
He received the blessing of God,
And it was extended to his descendants.

God said to king Wăn,
'Be not like those who reject this and cling to that;
Be not like those who are ruled by their likings and desires;'
So he grandly ascended before others to the height (of virtue).
The people of Mî were disobedient,
Daring to oppose our great country,
And invaded Yüan, marching to Kung.
The king rose, majestic in his wrath;
He marshalled his troops,
To stop the invading foes;
To consolidate the prosperity of Kâu;
To meet the expectations of all under heaven.

He remained quietly in the capital,
But (his troops) went on from the borders of Yüan.
They ascended our lofty ridges,
And (the enemy) arrayed no forces on our hills,
On our hills, small or large,
Nor drank at our springs,
Our springs or our pools.
He then determined the finest of the plains,
And settled on the south of Khî,
On the banks of ​the Wei,
The centre of all the states,
The resort of the lower people.

God said to king Wăn,
'I am pleased with your intelligent virtue,
Not loudly proclaimed nor pourtrayed,
Without extravagance or changeableness,
Without consciousness of effort on your part,
In accordance with the pattern of God.'
God said to king Wăn,
'Take measures against the country of your foes.
Along with your brethren,
Get ready your scaling ladders,
And your engines of onfall and assault,
To attack the walls of Khung.'

The engines of onfall and assault were (at first) gently plied,
Against the walls of Khung high and great;
Captives for the question were brought in, one after another;
The left ears (of the slain) were taken leisurely.
He had sacrificed to God and to the Father of War,
Thus seeking to induce ​submission,
And throughout the region none had dared to insult him.
The engines of onfall and assault were (then) vigorously plied,
Against the walls of Khung very strong.
He attacked it, and let loose all his forces;
He extinguished (its sacrifices), and made an end of its existence;
And throughout the kingdom none dared to oppose him.
