Outward demeanour, cautious and grave,
Is an indication of the (inward) virtue.
People have the saying,
'There is no wise man who is not (also) stupid.'
The stupidity of the ordinary man
Is determined by his (natural) defects.
The stupidity of the wise man
Is from his doing violence (to his proper character).

What is most powerful is the being the man;—
​In all quarters (of the state) men are influenced by it.
To an upright virtuous conduct
All in the four quarters of the state render obedient homage.
With great counsels and determinate orders,
With far-reaching plans and timely announcements,
And with reverent care of his outward demeanour,
One will become the pattern of the people.

As for the circumstances of the present time,
You are bent on error and confusion in your government.
Your virtue is subverted;
You are besotted by drink.
Although you thus pursue nothing but pleasure,
How is it you do not think of your relation to the past,
And do not widely study the former kings,
That you might hold fast their wise laws?

Shall not those whom great Heaven does not approve of,
Surely as the waters flow from a spring,
Sink down together in ruin?
Rise early and go to bed late,
Sprinkle and sweep your courtyard;—
So
as to be a pattern to the people.
Have in good order your chariots and horses,
Your bows and arrows, and (other) weapons of war;—
To
be prepared for warlike action,
To keep at a distance (the hordes of) the south.

Perfect what concerns your officers and people;
​Be careful of your duties as a prince (of the kingdom).
To be prepared for unforeseen dangers,
Be cautious of what you say;
Be reverentially careful of your outward behaviour;
In all things be mild and correct.
A flaw in a mace of white jade
May be ground away;
But for a flaw in speech
Nothing can be done.

Do not speak lightly; your words are your own.
Do not say, 'This is of little importance;
No one can hold my tongue for me.'
Words are not to be cast away.
Every word finds its answer;
Every good deed has its recompense.
If you are gracious among your friends,
And to the people, as if they were your children,
Your descendants will continue in unbroken line,
And all the people will surely be obedient to you.

Looked at in friendly intercourse with superior men,
You make your countenance harmonious and mild;
Anxious not to do anything wrong.
Looked at in your chamber,
You ought to be equally free from shame before the light which shines in.
Do not say, 'This place is not public;
No one can see me here.'
The approaches of spiritual beings
Cannot be calculated beforehand;
But the more should they not be slighted.
