The illustration of illustrious (virtue) is required below,
And the dread majesty is on high.
Heaven is not readily to be relied on;
It is not easy to be king.
Yin's rightful heir to the heavenly seat
Was not permitted to possess the kingdom.

Zăn, the second of the princesses of Kih,
From (the domain of) Yin-shang,
Came to be married to (the prince of) Kâu,
And became his wife in his
​capital.
Both she and king Kî
Were entirely virtuous.
(Then) Thâi-zăn became pregnant,
And gave birth to our king Wăn.

This king Wăn,
Watchfully and reverently,
With entire intelligence served God,
And so secured the great blessing.
His virtue was without deflection;
And in consequence he received (the allegiance of) the states from all quarters.

Heaven surveyed this lower world;
And its appointment lighted (on king Wăn).
In his early years,
It made for him a mate;—
On
the north of the Hsiâ,
On the banks of the Wei.
When king Wăn would marry,
There was the lady in a large state.

In a large state was the lady,
Like a fair denizen of heaven.
The ceremonies determined the auspiciousness (of the union),
And in person he met her on the Wei.
Over it he made a bridge of boats;
The glory (of the occasion) was illustrious.

The favouring appointment was from Heaven,
Giving the throne to our king Wăn,
In the capital of Kâu.
The lady-successor was from Hsin,
Its eldest daughter, who came to marry him.
She was blessed to give birth to king Wû,
Who was preserved, and helped, and received (also) the appoint​ment,
And in accordance with it smote the great Shang.

The troops of Yin-shang
Were collected like a forest,
And marshalled in the wilderness of Mû.
We rose (to the crisis);
'God is with you,' (said Shang-fû to the king),
'Have no doubts in your heart.'

The wilderness of Mû spread out extensive;
Bright shone the chariots of sandal;
The teams of bays, black-maned and white-bellied, galloped along;
The Grand-Master Shang-fû
Was like an eagle on the wing,
Assisting king Wû,
Who at one onset smote the great Shang.
That morning's encounter was followed by a clear, bright (day).
