i 〇
1 J
ODES OF SI1AOU AND Tlif: SOUTH.
Wo mu.'-t suppose lhat the pince, who is the
subject of thecde, is hunting in spring, by some
hike or stream where such rushes were common.
Maou and Choo say nothing inure about ^0
than tliat it is the name of a grass. According
to the Sliwoh-wan, it should be a kind of artemi-
sia. One account of it says that its flowers
grow like the catkins of the willow, and fly
about in the wind, like hair.
LI. 2. Maou gives as 4 the female of the
swine;， and in the connection we must under-
stand the wild animal. Choo makes it just the
opposite, — the male, Maou took liis account
from the Urh-ya; but in both cases I imagine
there is an error of the text, — for To
shoot female animals would be inconsistent with
the benevolence which the piece is understood
to celebrate. The Kwang-ya, wi hout reference
to the sex, pays, 4 the pa is a pig two years old/
and all authorities agree in taking tslun(/. as one,
4 one year old.* But we cannot suppose that the
poet laid any stress on these special distinctions
of the terms. He varied them to suit his
rhymes merely. by one discharge，’
».<?, of his arrows, acc. to Choo. The prickers, it
is understood, had driven together a herd of the
animals ； but the noble would not kill them all.
lie contented himself with discharging the four
arrows, which conslituted what we may call a
round. But could he kill 5 boars with 4 ar-
rows ? Choo supposes that one of the arrows
transfixed two of tliem. This does not seem
very likely; and I am inclined to adopt the view
of K4ang-shiiig, as expounded by Ying-tah, tliat
oat of 5 boars driven together the prince would
shoot only one (君] £ 一 * 發， 必翼五
LI. H. The great battle of the ode, however,
is over Maou and Choo, after him,
take these terms as the name of a wild beast,
4 a righteous beast； a white tiger, with black
spots, which does not tread on live grass, and
does not eat any living thing, making its ap-
pearance when a Slate is ruled by a prince of
perfect benevolence and sincerity. Being a ti-
ger, it might be expected to kiil animals, like
other tigers, but it only eats the flesh of such as
have died a natural death.， This view of the
terms was not challenged till Gow-yang Sew of
the Sung dyn., who contended that we are to
understand by them the huntsmen of the prin-
ce's park. Since his time this interpretation has
been variously enlarged and insisted on. One
of the ablest assertors of it is Yen Ts4an, who
appeals to the fact that the Urh-ya says nothing
of the fabulous animal, as a proof that it was not
heard of before Maou. The imperial editors,
however, refute this statement, and I agree Avith
them that the old view is not to be disturbed.
The analogy of the Lin che che is decisive in its
favour. 宁嗟乎 = 于嗟 • • • 兮。 f
that ode.
The rhymes are — in st. 1, 葭 *， 靶 *， 虞，
and 虞 of st. 2, cat. 5, 1. 1 : in 2, 蓬， cat. 9.
Concluding Note. Confucius once (Ana.
XVII. x.) told his son to study the Chow-nan and
Shaoa-nan, adding that 4 the man wlio has not
done so is like one who stands with his face
right against a wall/ Like many more of the
sayings of the sage, it seems to tell us a great
deal, while yet we can lay hold of nothing
positive in it.
Choo He says, *The first four odes in this 2d
Book speak of the wives of princes and great
officers, and show how at tliat time princes and
great officers had come under tlie transforming
influence of kin<? Wan, so that they cultivated
their persons and regulated rightly their families.
rl'he other pieces show how the chief prince
among the States spread abroad the influence of
kint? Wn,n, and how other princes cultivated it
in their families and through their States.
Though nothing is said in them about king
Wan, yet the wide effects of his brilliant virtue
and renovation of the people appear in them.
They were so wrought upon, they knew not
how. l^iere is only the 13th piece which we
are unable to understand, and with the per-
plexities of which we need not trouble ourselves.*
One of the Chengs says, 4 The right regulation
of the family is the first step towards the good
govt, of all the empire. The two Nan contain
tlie principles of that regulation, setting forth
the virtues of the queen, of princesses, and the
wives of great officers, substantially the same
wliea they are extended to the families of in-
ferior officers and of the common people. Hence
these odes were used at courts and village
gatherings. They sang them in the courts and
in the lanes, thus giving their tone to the man-
ners of all under heaven.*
These glowing pictures do not approve them-
selves so much to a western reader. He cannot
appreciate the institution of the harem. West-
ern wives cannot submit to the position of T{ae-
sze herself. Western young ladies like to be
married 4 decently and in order,* according to
rule, with all the ceremonies; but they want
other qualities in their suitors more important
than an observance of formalities. Where pu-
rity and frugality in young lady and wife are
celebrated in these pieces, we can appreciate
them. The readiness on the part of the wife
to submit to separation from her husband, when
public duty calls him away from her, is also
very admirable. But upon the whole the
family-regulation which appears here is not of a
high order, and the place assigned to the wife is
one of degradation.
